Summit for organisations opposed to expropriation without compensation 30 November 2018 The business organisation Sakeliga today announced a follow-up summit for organisations opposed to expropriation without compensation. The summit is being organised on an urgent basis to take place on 5 December, the day following the day on which Parliament will be debating the recommendation by the Constitutional Review Committee. Several of the most important organisations opposed to expropriation without compensation – including non-governmental organisations and political parties – have already confirmed their participation in spite of short notice and a full year-end programme. Piet le Roux, chief executive of Sakeliga, said the aim of the summit was to discuss the latest developments regarding expropriation and amendment of the Constitution: “Following the Constitutional Riview Committee’s recommendation to amend the Constitution, Parliament will debate the recommendation and will then proceed on the basis thereof. The recommendation heralds a new phase in the debate on expropriation without compensation. It is therefore appropriate for organisations who expressed their opposition to amending the Constitution during the previous phase to now meet again to discuss the developments.” The summit on 5 December will be the second summit this year for organisations opposed to expropriation without compensation. Sakeliga hosted the first summit on 6 March this year. On that date, more than a dozen organisations thoroughly discussed the matter within a week of Parliament adopting the initial motion on expropriation without compensation. The following 14 organisations have so far confirmed attending the summit, subject to the parliamentary programme: ACDP; AfriForum; Afrikanerbond; AgriSA; Cope; DA; Dear South Africa; FW de Klerk Foundation; Johannesburg Attorneys Association; Sakeliga; Solidarity; TLU SA; VF+; Free Market Foundation. The summit is open to invited participants, invited observers and members of the media. Organisations and other interested parties who also would like to attend the summit are requested to email Sakeliga at diens@sakeliga.co.za. Issued by Piet le Roux, CEO, Sakeliga, 30 November 2018