NUM Western Cape Region response on the adoption of the draft Integrated Resource Plan 2018 28 November 2018 The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM)  welcomes the adoption of the draft Integrated Resource Plan2018 and recommendations detailed by the Portfolio Committee on Energy. The realization and preservation of the country’s economic prosperity should at all times be the output of collective thinking of all citizens. The recommendations and their context are indeed reflective of the various submissions made by the different stakeholders. We hope that the Department of Energy will implement these recommendations to their full extent. Our observation on how the Department of Energy has been conducting its business particularly listening and engaging all stakeholders has been disappointing. "While the Portfolio Committee recommends a thorough socio-economic assessment on various energy mix scenarios in preparation for 2020, we know now already that any further signing of the Power Purchase Agreements will worsen the already worsening financial situation of Eskom and overburdening the ordinary citizens who daily face the ever-escalating prices of electricity to benefit the few individuals," said Soso Fisa, NUM Western Cape Regional Secretary. "Suffice to say before the public hearings there was skewed and subjective thinking particularly towards the elimination of other technologies. We are delighted to observe serious expression from the portfolio committee which calls for inclusion of other technologies as being critical elements of South Africa’s energy mix. We continue to maintain that there should be more discussion and investment on how best we can exploit clean coal technologies, not its elimination and that cheaper sources of electricity should not be ignored," Fisa added. We lastly wish to caution the SA Wind CEO on her response to the NUM March to the Union Buildings. If she is really sincere about the well being of this country and all its citizens she will agree with the NUM that renewables are currently not affordable not only in South Africa but in many other countries that have tried them. She will further agree with the NUM that not all renewables are environmentally friendly as some continue to threaten the bird's lives. She will further agree with NUM that making mention of 32 138 job years over 20 years is misleading the public to believe that this is a sizeable number while it is a mere 1 607 piece jobs over two full decades. As the responsible trade union, we are available to engage her should that need arise. Issued by Soso Fisa, NUM Western Cape Regional Secretary, 28 November 2018