Failing ANC can no longer ignore call for school safety audits 22 November 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) extends its heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Grade 1 Dikeledi Makapan Primary School  pupil, who lost his life in a most tragic and violent manner. There are no words that can adequately and fully convey condolences that can bring solace to the pain a family experiences by the death of a child. It is a great injustice when a young life with so much potential and promise is robbed from us. The family remains in our thoughts and prayers during this most difficult and trying time. We will be making contact with the family to assist where we can. We further call on the community to rally behind and support the mourning family – the community has lost a child. The DA in the North West calls on the MEC for Education, Sello Lehare, to conduct a full audit on the current safety and security situation at all schools in the province following the fatal stabbing. We also request the audit report to be tabled in the Legislature where solutions can be identified in collaboration with all political parties in a nonpartisan manner and adequate recommendations be made on the way forward. We will actively participate in this process with the sole aim to restore the integrity of the schooling system to the benefit of all learners, teachers and parents in the province. The DA in the North West is completely taken aback by the brutal, tragic event that took place at the school. This is not the first incident in North West where innocent learners were murdered and we can only hope this latest tragic incident will spur the necessary action by government to restore safety and security. We also call on Premier Job Mokgoro to fully and publicly support this initiative and that he instructs his Executive Council to make the necessary resources available to facilitate an overhaul in the schooling system to ensure the safety and security of learners and teachers. Schools in the North West, and in greater South Africa, have recently seen a spate of violence by learners against learners, learners against teachers and teachers against learners. Numerous cases of rape and physical violence have been exposed. This violence is a blight on the moral consciousness on our society. As a nation, we need to introspect on where we have strayed from the path, and immediately begin a process to stop the decay so evident in our schools. Government should ensure controlled access to schools and that they implement the necessary security measures. These precautions would also reduce the exposure of learners and teachers to gangsterism and drug peddling. As a father, it pains me to see parents suffer from such a loss and I will fight to ensure that justice prevails and that our children are kept safe. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 22 November 2018