148 GPG employees still doing business with government 26 November 2018 It has come to the attention of the Democratic Alliance (DA) that a total of 148 employees are still doing business government. This was revealed to me in a reply to written questions tabled in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. According to the MEC for Finance, Barbara Creecy, the following departments have employees who are doing business with government: DEPARTMENT NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES Department of Agriculture and Rural Development 4 Department of Community Safety 1 Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs 1 Department of Economic Development 1 Department of Education 48 E-Government 3 Department of Health 70 Department of Human Settlements 3 Department of Infrastructure Development 7 Provincial Treasury 2 Roads and Transport 2 Sports, Arts, Culture and Recreation 6 TOTAL 148 The department with the most employees doing business with government is the Department of Health. According to MEC Creecy, the information obtained about the number of employees doing business with government is currently being analysed further. This raises serious concerns about the measures that are in place to ensure that government tenders are awarded in a fair and transparent process and that corruption is eradicated. I will be tabling further questions in the house to ascertain the following: When will the investigation into the officials doing business with government be finalised? What action has been taken against government officials found to be doing business with government? What measures will government be implementing to ensure that this does not happen again? It is high time that the government implements a transparent tender system that promotes fair access to tenders for all Gauteng businesses. If the failing ANC government is serious about promoting township revitalisation to ensure sustainability of small business then they should ensure that the tender system is accessible. Come 2019, when we govern in Gauteng we will establish an independent unit dedicated to identifying, fighting and prosecuting corruption. Issued by Kingsol Chabalala, DA Team One Gauteng Spokesperson on Corruption, 26 November 2018