We need to know how many of Andile Ramaphosa's 34 companies have contracts with Bosasa 20 November 2018 President Cyril Ramaphosa told Parliament and the people of South Africa that his son, Andile Ramaphosa, has done “consulting work” for controversial facilities management company, African Global (formerly Bosasa), for which he received remuneration. The President confirmed that he has personally seen the contract between the two parties. However, it remains a mystery as to which of the 34 companies Ramaphosa Jr is connected to has a contract with African Global, how many contracts exist, and how much money Ramaphosa Jr has made from a company which the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) found to be embroiled in allegations of fraud and corruption. I will therefore today be submitting an application in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act (PAIA), to Andile Ramaphosa in his personal capacity, in order to gain access to all agreements and contracts signed between himself/his companies and African Global/Bosasa. Specifically, this PAIA application seeks to establish the following: Which of the 34 companies Andile Ramaphosa is, or was, a director of did any work for African Global or Bosasa; How many contracts exist; The nature of the services rendered; and The rand value of the services rendered. With African Global CEO, Gavin Watson, giving Cyril Ramaphosa R 500 000 towards his internal election campaign to become ANC President, it is vital South Africans are assured that no dodgy dealings are at play between the Ramaphosa’s and African Global. The Ramaphosa's must play open cards with the people of South Africa. The previous ANC President, Jacob Zuma, ensured his son Duduzane got rich via connections to compromised and corrupt companies. It appears history is repeating itself. That is why President Ramaphosa must not hesitate in appointing a full-scale independent inquiry - headed by a retired judge to be selected by the Chief Justice - to fully investigate the Bosasa scandal, which now involves the President and his family. Despite a Special Investigating Unit (SIU) report showing large-scale fraud and corruption relating to the company's unethical practices, Bosasa has secured a number of lucrative contracts with government departments and entities - including the Departments of Justice, Correctional Services and Airports Company South Africa (ACSA) - worth over R10 billion. Moreover, this is the same company that allegedly funded former President Jacob Zuma’s birthday bashes in 2015 and 2016, to the estimated value of R3.5 million. The reality is that the ANC cannot be reformed; it must be removed from government. For the ANC, rich and connected “insiders” continue to unfairly benefit at the expense of poor and unemployed “outsiders”. It is this system of corruption that locks out ordinary South Africans from accessing opportunity.  A DA national government would break down such barriers and create fair access to opportunity for all – not just the connected few. Issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 20 November 2018