Failing ANC has left the borders broken and the SANDF thinly spread 29 November 2018 Over the past month, the Democratic Alliance (DA) embarked on a border tour in order to assess the true state of our country’s borders. The findings of this tour are alarming and paints a grim picture of how the ANC has failed in securing our country’s borders. The DA inspected the Limpopo - Zimbabwe border, KwaZulu-Natal – Mozambique border and North West - Botswana border, where we uncovered a number of issues, including: Illegal cross border trading; Alleged social grant fraud; Porous borders, no fence; Poor military patrolling; Hijacking syndicates. These are the broad issues we found at each of the border posts: Musina, Limpopo / Zimbabwe On 12 November the DA visited the Beit Bridge border in Limpopo between South Africa and Zimbabwe. Astoundingly we came across areas of the fence which had been cut through, as well as a big open and unmanned gate large enough for a truck to drive through. Standing along our border, we were able to capture footage of people on the other side of the border watching the South African side. From there, they could see SANDF patrols arriving and leaving, and thereby ascertain the best time to cross undetected. KwaZulu-Natal / Mozambique On 13 November we visited the Manguzi Border in KwaZulu-Natal between South Africa and Mozambique. SANDF members we spoke to here indicated the crucial need for a proper fence, but also to clear the area 100m from the fence, for watch towers, infrared equipment and drones. We were able to cross into Mozambique, buy fish, and cross back into South Africa. We also engaged with terrified communities who are being taken advantage of by carjacking syndicates. It emerged in our conversations with SANDF members we encountered that there may well be powerful law enforcement individuals working with the syndicates, making it impossible to effectively police these crimes and end the syndicates. We also learned that there are people coming across the border to collect social grants and shop in South Africa before returning across the border. This issue is not tied to people who wish to stay in South Africa, but rather people whose unimpeded movement into our country allows them to exploit benefits intended for South Africans. The DA  therefore calls for an urgent investigation by the SAPS on the alleged social grant fraud. This is happening at a time when South Africa is experiencing widespread problems ensuring that lawful grant beneficiaries receive their grants timeously. We will therefore be partnering with our Shadow Minister for social development to look into the credibility of these complaints. North West / Botswana On 28 November we visited Skilpadshek Border in the North West on the border with Botswana. We spoke to a SANDF official off the record who revealed that the road along the border is inaccessible for the military, essentially making it impossible for them to patrol. It was also revealed that the border was not fenced with appropriate border fence but rather with agricultural fence. The ANC has left our borders in disarray and strong action has to be taken to ensure that our borders are fixed. It is for this reason, the party has undertaken to request an urgent meeting with the SANDF chief to discuss the concerns and challenges the army face in securing our borders. We also challenge the newly appointed Home Affairs Minister Siyabonga Cwele to accompany the DA to see the effect of Home Affairs corruption at the borders. The DA is the only party that is capable of fixing our porous borders. The DA will secure our borders and stop illegal immigration by: Arresting, detaining and deporting those who repeatedly enter our country illegally Ensuring undocumented immigrants are regularised or assisted in leaving the country if they do not meet the criteria for remaining in the country. Strengthening our border posts. Through proper control and order, we can create corruption-free and effective border security and control. Eradicating the corruption and inefficiency endemic to Home Affairs. Together with the push to secure our borders and regularize migrants, we are equally committed to: Assist, support and care for legitimate refugees and asylum seekers. Attract foreign nationals with scarce skills to South Africa to help us grow our economy and create jobs. Only the DA’s plan takes a holistic approach. There are humanitarian reasons for allowing migrants, whether refugees or economic migrants, into South Africa. More importantly, there are developmental reasons if we are to build the diverse country we want, and to attract the skills we need. By allowing migrants into our country, we take upon ourselves the duties set forth in our Constitution to provide services to the new entrants. The only responsible way to do this is to have a sound approach to recording and monitoring migration. This will give us the ability to plan effectively for the services we must provide, as well as to guarantee the security of everyone who finds themselves within our borders at all times. Issued by Jacques Julius, DA Spokesperson on Immigration, 29 November 2018