AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY 20 November 2018 STATEMENT OF THE AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS FOLLOWING THE NATIONAL WORKING COMMITTEE MEETING HELD ON 19TH OF NOVEMBER 2018 The African National Congress held an ordinary meeting of the National Working Committee (NWC) on Monday the 19th of November 2018 in Mpumalanga. The NWC is a constitutional structure of the ANC mandated with the day to day running of the organisation and the implementation of the resolution of the National Executive Committee. The NWC received and considered a number of reports on the affairs of the organisation, specifically recommendations of the National Dispute Resolution Committee. The NWC engaged extensively with the ANC Elections Sub-Committee Report which provided a comprehensive update on the ongoing electioneering campaign including the weekly roll out of the #ThumaMina campaign in various Provinces and Municipalities. ON ELECTIONS The NWC noted the report by Head of Elections on the ongoing electioneering work: That the #ThumaMina campaign is increasing interaction between structures of the ANC and Communities exemplified by the weekly visits to various Provinces by the National Executive Committee led by the National Officials. That the #ThumaMina campaign trail has already been to the following Provinces: Gauteng Eastern Cape Free State Kwa-Zulu Natal Mpumalanga That the #ThumaMina campaign trail will be going to the Province of Limpopo on the Weekend of the 24th to the 25th of November 2019 led by the National Officials and the National Executive Committee; That the #ThumaMina Campaign trail provides the national leadership of the ANC with first hand experience of community desires as well as service delivery challenges on the ground including getting to understand how some of the challenges are being attended to in the interest of the people. ON STATE CAPTURE The NWC noted the ongoing work of the Zondo Commission of Inquiry on State Capture and further reaffirmed its support for the work of the commission to uncover the truth and prevent its blight from happening again. The ANC is cooperating with the commission and has encouraged its members to come forward should they have information that could be helpful to the work of the commission. ON NORTH WEST – MATLOSANA MUNICIPALITY The NWC received a report from the Deputy Secretary General on undertakings made to return the Matlosana Municipality in the North West to normalcy following the abrupt and unsanctioned removal of an ANC Mayor by ANC Councillors in collusion with the Opposition. The NWC agreed that un-mandated collusion with the opposition is a dismissible offense and cannot be tolerated; The NWC accepted the intervention made through the ANC Secretary General Office (SGO) leading to the reinstatement of the Mayor of Matlosana Municipality as well as immediate efforts to roll out a program of action taking Council to communities. ON VBS The NWC reiterated the stance of ANC NEC affirming its dismay with the impact of the VBS issues on the lives of ordinary people across the country, and restated its position that those found guilty of wrong doing must face the wrath of the law. The NWC urged the National Integrity Commission to expedite meeting with all comrades who may be implicated in the VBS Report to effect finality and completeness of the process as directed by the NEC. ON THE ANCYL NATIONAL CONFERENCE That the ANC SGO through a dedicated NEC Task Team must continue to work closely with the ANCYL NEC to assist them with the process of convening their 26th ANCYL National Conference expected to sit next month. ON HARRY GWALA REGION The NWC received a report that the ANC won a case brought by a few disgruntled ANC members who wanted the outcomes of the Previous Regional Conference nullified. The court duly dismissed the Application by these members with costs effectively affirming the Election of the REC into office. The NWC welcomed the establishment of an NEC-Ied Task Team that is expected to work with the PEC of KZN and REC of Harry Gwala to consolidate and accelerate electioneering work in the Region. ON THE NATIONAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION COMMITTEE Dr. W.B Rubusana The NWC received the report of the National Dispute Resolution Committee led by the DSG of the ANC Cde Jessie Duarte on the convening of the Dr. W.B Rubusana Regional Conference and welcomed its findings that: $ The Dr W.B Rubusana Regional Conference was legitimate The conference promoted internal democracy and majority participation by all delegates That the elected Regional Chairperson Cde Pumlani Mkolo steps aside as per the recommendation of the Integrity Committee Report of 2015 until his appeal to the NEC of the ANC is concluded and a pronouncement is made on it. ON Nelson Mandela Region The NWC welcomed the NDRC report endorsing the Eastern Cape PEC decision on the disbandment of the of Nelson Mandela Regional Executive Committee following n an appeal by the REC. The NWC urged the Eastern Cape Provincial Executive Committee to establish an all inclusive Regional Task Team. The NWC further noted the implementation of the NEC decision directing Comrade Andile Lungisa to resign as a Member of the Mayoral Committee of the Nelson Mandela Metro and remain as an ordinary Councillor until his court appeal process is concluded. Conclusion The NWC urged Members of the African National Congress throughout the length of and breath of the country to be seized with the immediate task of Unity and Renewal and further ensure that work is done on a daily basis to find solutions to the problems and challenges that our people are confronted with. The NWC appealed to its members to work tirelessly encouraging first time voters to take advantage of the final IEC voter registration during the weekend of the 26th and 27th of January 2019 and to also remind registered voters to check and verify their particulars in order to deliver a decisive victory for the African National Congress in the 2019 General Elections. Issued by the ANC Secretary-General, comrade Ace Magashule, 20 November 2018