STATEMENT OF THE AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS ON THE OUTCOMES OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE ON LAND EXPROPRIATION WITHOUT COMPENSATION 15 November 2018 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the position adopted by the Constitutional Review Committee, with specific reference to the need to amend section 25 of the constitution to effect land expropriation without compensation. This position is consistent with the views expressed by the majority of our people during the recent public hearings. We commend the Committee for their sterling work during and beyond the public hearing process. We are confident that this position resonates with the aspirations of the overwhelming majority of our people. Land is not only an economic asset, it also restores the dignity of our people who have been dispossessed of their land for centuries. This process is a vindication of the ANC resolution on land expropriation without compensation as adopted by the 54th National Conference. We urge all members of the National Assembly not to betray the will of our people when this matter is tabled in the National Assembly in the not-so-distant future. The return of the land is the foundation for any program of Radical Economic Transformation and the implementation of the Second Phase of our National Democratic Revolution. The ANC is confident that this process will go a long way in assisting the country to redress the injustices of our past and resolve the land question once and for all. The return of the land to the rightful owners, who are the indigenous Blacks and Africans in particular from whom the land was stolen is a critical imperative. This was a gross historical injustice that must be corrected, and is essential for the restoration of the dignity of our people, and their full economic empowerment. We share the sentiment echoed by our President Cyril Ramaphosa during his Address at the European Parliament that Africa is the cradle of humankind. "It is rich in land and water, abundant in minerals and blessed with a young, vibrant population. It is the next frontier for growth, innovation and social progress" and as our President conceded that to realise this potential, the people of Africa must unite in the same way that our people must unite behind these noble and courageous program of Land Expropriation without compensation. Statement issued by Pule Mabe, African National Congress, 15 November 2018