DA lays charges against failing ANC for contravening the Electoral Act 12 November 2018 Today, the Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West laid charges against the failing ANC (Case number CAS52/11/2018), under the Electoral Act at the Lomanyaneng SAPS, after evidence emerged that they were pasting their election posters over those of the DA for the Mahikeng ward 17 by-election. Besides the DA poster concealment, the failing ANC was brazen enough to intentionally damage and remove DA posters. In one street alone, 25 DA posters were removed. This is common ANC practice in the run-up to elections. Subsection 92 of the Electoral Act reads: Prohibitions concerning placards and billboards during election: From the date on which an election is called to the date the result of the election is determined and declared in terms of section 57, no person may deface or unlawfully remove any billboard, placard or poster published by a registered party or candidate. We have also approached the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) and asked for an investigation. It is unlawful to infringe on the rights of other political parties to canvas and compete in elections in a free and fair manner. This sort of behaviour by the failing ANC shows the blatant disregard the party has for our democracy, laws and the rules of the IEC. We will not tolerate this kind of behaviour as we are about to enter the 2019 campaign season in the run-up to one of the most important elections democratic South Africa has ever had. The DA believes in the letter of the law and has respect for legislation and the necessity to ensure that elections are truly fair and free. Actions like this put a serious question mark on the integrity of elections. We will not hesitate to report these acts and will not tolerate any form of intimidation, damage to property or other illegal actions which can unfairly impact election results and compromise the Rights of people to freely participate within the political and electoral environment without any prejudice or undue influence. Elections should be contested in a free and fair manner that reflect the will of the people – and not the will of an ever desperate failing ANC struggling to hold on to power. Only the DA can bring change that builds One South Africa for All. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 12 November 2018