Appointment of Mr Tau Morwe as Acting Group Chief Executive of Transnet 5 November 2018 Transnet is pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Tau Morwe as Acting Group Chief Executive of Transnet. This is for a period from 1st November 2018 to 30th April 2019. He will also serve as a member of the Transnet board. The appointment of Mr Morwe was approved by our shareholder minister, Mr Pravin Gordhan, Minister of Public Enterprises. Mr Morwe brings with him a wealth of experience garnered during his previous tenure at Transnet. He joined Transnet in 1997 and ratcheted up seventeen years of service with the company. He served as CE of three of the Transnet divisions: National Ports Authority, Freight Rail and Port Terminals. Mr Morwe spearheaded South Africa’s quest to improve our country’s port system for more than a decade, including establishing and entrenching TPT’s strategic role within Transnet as the division’s first Chief Executive. In addition, Mr Morwe led the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa (PMAESA) from 2011 to 2014. He strengthened relations among member ports and promoted regional cooperation and integration. His service was invaluable to our country, ensuring that South Africa continues to play its role in growing regional economies. Mr Morwe has also served as a board member of several entities, including KwaZulu-Natal Trade and Investment, the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Agriport Partnership. He is a BA Economics graduate from Howard University in the USA and also holds qualifications from the National University in Singapore. Subsequent to his departure from Transnet in 2015, he has served extensively as a transport and logistics consultant in South Africa as well as on the rest of the continent. Mr Morwe’s crucial appointment will ensure that Transnet strengthens and consolidates its governance procedures, adding much-needed impetus in ensuring that our state-run institutions are well-governed and serve the people of South Africa. We wish him well in his new role. Issued on behalf of Transnet Board of Directors by Dr. Popo Molefe, Transnet Chairperson, 5 November 2018