EFF STATEMENT ON THE FIRING OF TOM MOYANE Friday, 02 November, 2018 The EFF rejects the latest move by President Ramaphosa to fire Tom Moyane without following any due and fair processes. This we see as part of a Ramaphosa's general war against black professionals because exactly the same treatment was recently given to Transnet CEO Siyabonga Gama. Ramaphosa has fired Moyane because of the recommendations and advice of the interim report by the Nugent Commission. This is clearly unlawful and unconstitutional for many reasons. Amongst them is that the Nugent Commission itself may soon be declared to be unlawful by the Constitutional Court as it has been taken under review. Thus, Ramaphosa has no business pre-empting that court decision. Another absurdity is that by firing Moyane through the Nugent Commission, Ramaphosa has effectively killed his own Disciplinary Inquiry into alleged misconduct by Moyane. This shows confusion and lack of character and leadership. It confirms the violation of natural justice espoused by the principle of double jeopardy in that all along the Nugent Commission was about firing Moyane, when at the same time, there was a Disciplinary Process against him. For the record we repeat that the EFF does not hold the view that Moyane is innocent. We actually believe that Moyane is part of the problems that characterized the Zuma era of kleptocracy. However, we cannot allow Ramaphosa, Pravin Gordhan, the media and other agents of White Monopoly Capital to suspend the Constitution for the flimsy excuse a "state capture clean up". The rule of law must be respected at all times, regardless of who is suspected of wrong doing. All those who are clapping hands as the Constitution is being eroded must be warned that by the time the system comes for you there may be nobody left to fight. The Bill of Rights must be applied equally to those human beings, regardless of whether we like them or dislike them. These are the ideas for which Solomon Mahlangu, Steve Biko and many others died for. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 2 November 2018