Corruption deprives youth of opportunities 12 November 2018 The Democratic Alliance in the Northern Cape adds its voice to growing calls for a criminal investigation into alleged corruption and irregularities in the hosting of the Northern Cape Youth Chamber of Commerce & Industries conference earlier this year. Members of the NYCCI reported that funds received from the provincial government, estimated at R2.8 million, were grossly abused. It is alleged that companies linked to the provincial secretary and his allies escalated the costs for non-existent services and goods which were never purchased. Among the claims are that a company which allegedly received R295 850 from the Northern Cape Department of Economic Development & Tourism to deliver regalia and stationery failed to do so and that another company which received R242 099 for marketing failed to deliver this service. The companies implicated in the misuse of public funds appear to be linked to office bearers in the chamber, which creates the unavoidable impression of patronage at the cost of true youth development. Similar allegations are made regarding the escalated costs for the provision of accommodation for a bloated number of delegates and the failure to provide promotional materials. The Department of Economic Development & Tourism has a poor reputation for the management of transfer payments and has, in the past, been chastised by the Auditor-General for failing to ensure that monies transferred by the department is used for its intended purpose. This appears to be yet another example where public funds are spent to maintain a network of political patronage. With youth unemployment in the province at an all-time high, we cannot afford to have a provincial government which actively denies our youth opportunities to grow, to start their own companies and to break the cycle of poverty. The DA has a proven track record of fighting corruption and expanding access to opportunities. In 2019, the DA stands ready to implement youth empowerment programs that will expand economic inclusion opportunities for all. Issued by Andrew Louw, DA Northern Cape Premier Candidate, 12 November 2018