EFF STATEMENT ON REVELATIONS THAT PRAVIN GORDHAN MET WITH THE GUPTAS. 07 November 2018 The Economic Freedom Fighters note the fact that, in his revised submission to the Commission on State Capture, the master manipulator and state capturer Pravin Gordhan will disclose that he met with the Guptas through ex President Jacob Zuma. Like they tried with Nhlanhla Nene, Tiso Blackstar propaganda newsletters are beginning to shape the narrative of what Pravin Gordhan will say in the Commission. For the longest time, Pravin Gordhan portrayed himself as a paragon of politic virtue, and sole warrior in the war against the Guptas' micromanagement of the key State decisions. What Pravin Gordhan did not reveal however, is that as a Minister of Finance, he was an accomplice to the Guptas' activities, because they gained traction during his tenure as Minister of Finance. The EFF is fully aware that the mob and Pravin Gordhan's propaganda Tiso Blackstar newsletters like Business Day, Sowetan, Finacial Mail and Sunday Times will attempt to drive an alternate and misleading narrative, like they did with the revelations of Nhlanhla Nene's relationship and friendship with the Guptas. It is becoming evident that virtually everyone who served in strategic positions in Zuma's cabinet since 2009 were in the pockets and under the micromanagement of the Guptas and this includes Pravin Gordhan. Outside of the Guptas control, Pravin Gordhan is immensely grounded in a criminal parallel State capture network that uses parallel illegal intelligence, SARS, Financial Intelligence Centre, some private corporations and certain sections of the media to micromanage the State, manipulate decisions, threaten and purge key leaders in state owned companies and government, and make a lot of money for their own networks. The nefarious state capture under Pravin Gordhan, extended accross many key institutions and undermines the Presidency because we know as a matter of fact that he takes key state decisions without the knowledge of the presidency. Like we did with the Guptas, the EFF will do everything in its power, to expose the Gordhan led criminal syndicate and parallel State whose philosophy and passion is to domesticate or undermine African leadership in key sectors of the State and economy. The EFF will write to Pravin Gordhan to demand honest answers about his control of the criminal syndicate; and about his many decisions and manipulations of authority in all his previous responsibilities. The EFF will also demand answers from the president on the proven misconduct and creation of a parallel State by Pravin Gordhan. The people of South Africa must once again trust the EFF in exposing state capture, criminal syndicates and corruption. Against many odds, we in the EFF played a central role in exposing the Gupta criminal syndicate and we will do the same in exposing the Gordhan criminal syndicate, which involves large amounts of money movements to different parts of the world. When he appears before the Commission on State Capture, Pravin Gordhan must tell the truth and nothing but the truth. He must explain how he became Minister of Finance under President Zuma in 2009. He must explain how Ivan Pillay, his friend, without any qualifications, became SARS Commisioner. He must explain how he established parallel intelligence. He must explain how he dealt with huge procurement in SARS and how he settled some of the huge tax evasion cases. We expect the truth and nothing but the truth. He must explain his relationship with the Guptas in detail. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 7 November 2018