Minister Nomvula Mokonyane declares salaries of current SABC executives 1 Nov 2018 Minister of Communications, Nomvula Mokonyane, today declared the executive salaries of the SABC. Responding to questions in the National Council of Provinces, the Minister stated that the current crop of Executives at the public broadcaster were earning significantly less than the previous crop of Executive Directors. The Minister announced that the current Group Chief Executive Officer earns a remuneration pacakage of R 5,1m, the Chief Operations Officer earns a total of R 4m and the  Chief Financial Officer, an amount of R 3m. These packages amount to 1,1% of the current salary bill of the SABC. The Minister further stated that the turn-around of the SABC cannot just be based on the laying off of workers but a total review of the business and the funding-model of the SABC. The Minister has again reiterated the view of government to have a comprehensive Turn-Around Task-Team that includes the Board of the SABC, Treasury and the department of Communications to ensure we finalize a sustainable turnaround plan. “Minister of Finance, Tito Mboweni, has agreed to meet and engage on the state of the SABC and the turnaround plan within the next three weeks to find solutions to the current financial challenges confronting the SABC.” “The shareholder to date has not consented to the current process of retrenchments currently being pursued by the Board and Management of the SABC.” Responding as to whether or not action has been taken against those found to have been responsible for the current challenges that face the SABC, the Minister stated that “We are pleased that the current Board and Executives are acting on the recommendations and outcomes of the various investigations that pronounced on the SABC, specifically the Public Protector, the Special Investigative Unit and Parliamentary Enquiry reports” said Minister Mokonyane. The Minister has also made a call for the NCOP together with Parliament, to seriously interrogate the insignificant funding by government of the SABC against the public mandate it is expected to carry. Statement issued by Mlimandlela Ndamase, Department of Communications, 1 November 2018