The lengthy road to education justice requires commitment from all A further response to Sara Gon The new Gauteng school feeder zones have been published following much anticipation. The effect will be to extend the five kilometre geographical radius from which schools admit applicants to 30 kilometers, with the result that schools will now be forced to prioritise learners from a greater geographic area. As the socioeconomic demographic of eligible applicants changes, fee-paying public schools will need to admit more low-income learners and provide them with fee exemptions. As with any new policy that holds the potential for radical change, commentary is polarised. Some are hailing it as a singular solution to the inequalities in our education system, while others - including Sara Gon in two articles that have appeared here – are lambasting what they perceive as a threat to enclaves of quality and exclusivity in the South African public education system. The main argument of the latter group is that public schools should be allowed the autonomy to intentionally limit the number of poor learners at their school, even though the South African Schools Act (1996) clearly states that no learner may be refused admission to a public school on the grounds that his or her parent is unable to pay school fees. Expanding feeder zones in Gauteng is not enough. Alone, the intervention will be unable to create the education system that the province’s learners deserve. To achieve this aim we need a revised school funding model, better mechanisms for accountability, and more efficient and targeted interventions into no-fee schools. This is not to say that changes to feeder zones are not a necessary component of reform. Indeed, if we are committed to a non-discriminatory schooling system, we must be willing to strike down any pillars of our education system that uphold discrimination based on demographic factors. A five kilometer radius for school feeder zones perpetuates unequal access to quality education based on class. The link is clear: Well-resourced schools are situated in well-resourced neighbourhoods, and thus a five kilometer radius allows schools to prioritise better-off applicants. Research by leading education specialist Nic Spaull and others has found that feeder zones are one of the primary strategies employed by fee-paying schools to restrict their applicant pool to those likely to be able to pay their fees. Tellingly, only around 10% of learners at fee-paying schools nationally receive fee exemptions. The revision of school feeder zones, then, is not only in line with our constitution, but with the most basic ideological commitment to equality of opportunity for all. In her response (Let's not destroy that which still functions, Politicsweb, 7 November), Sara Gon makes three important contributions to our discussion: 1. The failings of our education system are not due solely to Apartheid’s discriminatory provisioning of education resources.  Poor governance, poor policy decisions and corruption in post-Apartheid South Africa have entrenched inequalities that Apartheid created. 2.   Facilities at no-fee schools should be upgraded and the education afforded there must be improved. 3. As the socioeconomic demographics of schools change, schools will have less to spend on human, physical and educational resources and some parents will move their children to private schools I agree with all of the arguments above, but none of them preclude the need to alter school admission policies to ensure more equitable access to historically better-resourced schools. She adds two additional points, with which I take issue: 1. School communities are better equipped than government to tailor admissions policies to meet the needs of their communities. Unfortunately, almost all research on the topic shows that fee-paying schools use their admissions policies to exclude poor and black learners. Jonathan Jansen, in a paper titled “Race and education after ten years,” found school governing bodies to be the most crucial “point of power” in maintaining the status quo in schools. In “A new racial state? Exclusion and inclusion in education policy and practice in South Africa”, Crain Soudien and Yusuf Sayed found that schools believe they have much to protect and resist changes that they associate with a drop in standards. The academic consensus is that fee-charging schools exclude children who cannot pay fees by relying on feeder zones, language policies and discriminatory admissions interviews. Black applicants in particular are targets of intimidation and exclusionary practices because they are either perceived not to be able to pay, or because schools are worried about “white flight” as racial demographics change. In light of this research, we must ask which community’s needs are being protected when poor and black learners are excluded. Whatever the answer we come up with, if a community's needs are said to be protected by such exclusion, our understanding of “community” needs major redress. 2. A 30 kilometer radius is unjustifiably large as it will place a great financial burden on poor families. I agree that 30 kilometers is a large radius, and it is difficult for low-income families to fund the high costs of transport to and from school.  I am not privy to the decision making process around the new feeder zones, and I therefore can’t defend 30 kilometers specifically as the correct radius. However, it is insincere to suddenly start caring about the financial burden that poor families will have to endure due to transport costs, if one does not care about the (far greater) financial burden of a poor education received. Trends in school enrolment patterns and education-related migration show that parents are willing to send their children long distances if it means they will be afforded a better education. Learners from low-income areas have been applying to fee-paying schools en-masse, as commenters on this site have pointed out, they are just not accepted due to exclusionary school admissions policies. Clearly, the demand is there. Though clear that we hold different views, crucially, my conversation with Gon has allowed us to delve further into the under-appreciated crisis of school funding. Gon’s explanation of funding difficulties at the school-level must be complemented by an analysis of structural issues in school funding. The current funding model supports inequality in the public school sector by allowing private contributions to public schools which cater predominantly to children from wealthier families. To cite Nic Spaull in personal communication, “under apartheid White schools received disproportionately more funding through inequitable race-based tax-funded subsidies. Post-apartheid the same schools continued to receive disproportionately more funding but now this is channelled through class-based private contributions.” How can we rework our school funding model to ensure that these inequalities in per-pupil spending are minimized? As a reminder, only around 20% of government funding on education is redistributive in that it is distributed in accordance with the socio-economic status of the school. This redistributive component is not sufficient. Children who attend no-fee schools tend to have had no access to quality early childhood development and little exposure to a conducive learning environment outside school. They therefore enter school already disadvantaged as compared to their peers in better off communities. These learners are then exposed to bigger classroom sizes, teachers with lower subject knowledge and higher absentee rates, and less access to remedial classes or extracurricular activities. The remaining 80% of government funding, which covers personnel costs, is supposed to be spent equally on all schools. However, wealthier schools attract better qualified teachers who earn higher salaries, meaning that in most provinces (including Gauteng) personnel funding is actually pro-rich. Government funding per pupil is minimally redistributive at best, and is decreasing annually in real terms. Private funding per pupil in fee-paying schools is often enormous in comparison. Solutions are not easy to come by, but I relish the opportunity to engage on the issue of funding with Gon and others on this platform, and am eager to hear what they might propose as alternatives for a more equitable funding system. Funding is, of course, not the only cause of inequality in the South African education system. A forthcoming article by Birgit Weyss, a researcher on school funding, highlights the need for increased oversight mechanisms to monitor spending and implementation of interventions. She argues that spending needs to be better targeted on interventions that tackle barriers to learning in no-fee schools, such as high quality early childhood education opportunities and tailored teacher coaching and incentive programmes. Provinces need more budgetary space to implement sustained interventions and communities need to be empowered to serve as an accountability mechanism in ensuring that teaching and learning is happening as it should be. What the discussion around feeder zones has done is increase much-needed public discourse about the divided public education system and about who has access to its well-functioning part and why. The status quo has worked for me, as it has worked for many middle class South Africans. But we live in the most unequal country in the world and the status quo is failing the majority of poor, black South African learners, entrenching their poverty, and curtailing their ability to share in our nation’s wealth. Our education system desperately needs to be reformed. While we aggressively advocate for improvement to township and rural schools, middle class South Africans need to be willing to accept changes that will impact us too.