Bosasa executive contradicts Mantashe’s claims, placing him in the middle of the scandal The DA notes comments by Bosasa executive director, Papa Leshabane, confirming that the company did pay for security upgrades for Gwede Mantashe and that Mantashe “has called him for assistance”, casting further doubts on the Minister’s claims, on 30 September, denying the security upgrades. Minister Mantashe categorically denied having any knowledge of who paid for the security upgrades at his house. He also, unequivocally, stated that the ANC had paid for these upgrades. This has been contradicted by Bosasa’s Leshabane. If it is true that Mantashe lied, and is linked to this scandal, then it proves that the Bosasa scandal is implicating not only President Ramaphosa but many other members of the ANC leadership. This could mean that the ANC has, for years, been using Bosasa for ‘favours’ and ‘assistance’ in exchange for government contracts valued in the billions. This would constitute nothing more than yet another corrupt arrangement that exists within the ANC and its government. Now trading under the name African Global, the company has government contracts worth billions and has previously been reported to have paid for security upgrades and other benefits to other ANC ministers such as Minister of Environmental Affairs, Nomvula Mokonyane; Deputy Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Thabang Makwetla; ANC MP, Vincent Smith; former SAA Chairperson, Dudu Myeni. Indeed, there is a term for companies that benefit from government contracts lavishing money and “benefits” on politicians: corruption. This is precisely why I laid criminal charges against Mantashe, Mokonyane, Smith et al on 14 September in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act (Act 12 of 2004). And this is precisely why DA Leader, Mmusi Maimane, today referred the matter to the Office of the Public Protector. What has become clear is that the ANC is a corrupt organisation, a culture which runs deep in its structures and governments. It matters not, who leads the party, the cancer that is corruption and maladministration is destroying government institutions. The President is now embroiled in this matter along with other ANC executives and ministers. The DA is absolutely resolute in fighting corruption. We will not let this matter rest until each and everyone is brought to book. Statement issued by John Steenhuisen MP, Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance, 23 November 2018