DA calls on Madibeng Mayor to resign and account for stolen VBS millions 22 November 2018 Today, the DA North West Premier Candidate, Joe McGluwa and DA Team One South Africa Spokesperson on Corruption, Phumzile Van Damme conducted an oversight inspection of the Madibeng Local Municipality. They were shocked by the dire state of the area due to mismanagement and a lack of political will to serve the community by the failing ANC government. They will hand over a memorandum of demands to the Executive Mayor of Madibeng, Cllr Jostina Mothibe, later this afternoon. Further to this, the DA is calling for her immediate resignation as she is one of the kingpins in the corruption and mismanagement of the Madibeng Municipality.  Mothibe and her associates managed to collapse Madibeng to such a state that it is officially declared as the worst municipality in South Africa. Click here to see the memorandum that will be handed over to the Executive Mayor. Under her failed leadership, this Municipality illegally invested R50 million in the VBS Bank of which they received R20 million back. All this while basic service delivery like water supply is lacking. This area reaches temperatures of over 40-degrees Celsius and people don’t have access to clean, running water. Raw sewage being pumped in the Hartebeespoort Dam has compromised the water quality for supply and crop irrigation. Maintenance on water infrastructure is not occurring and water and sewerage pumps continually break down interrupting services, sometimes for months on end. The Brits Sewerage plant operates at only 40% of its capacity – thus releasing poor quality water into the Crocodile River. Mothibi, like most of her fellow ANC members, only serves her own interests and she did not blink an eye to spend R100 000 per month on a rental car for herself. The Auditor-General (AG) found that in the 2016/2017 financial year R561.9 million was wasted in irregular expenditure. Fraudulent credit cards were also opened in the name of the Madibeng municipality and unauthorized monthly deductions were made from the municipality’s bank account. According to the AG report, these transactions were not identified by the municipality’s system of internal control, such as the monthly bank reconciliations. We used the opportunity to actively engage with community members and the DA is encouraged by their realisation that the failing ANC has left them behind. Through our interactions it has become clear that this community will vote DA in next year’s election. A DA-led government puts the people first. The DA does not tolerate self-serving people who abuse the people’s money to enrich themselves. Only the DA can truly build One SA for All. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 22 November 2018