Agri SA blasts recommendation to amend Constitution 15 November 2018 Agri SA will today roll out the next phase of its tactical plan against expropriation without compensation (EWC). The recommendation of the Constitutional Review Committee on the amendment of section 25 is diametrically opposed to the crucial goals of protection of property, economic stability, job creation, investor confidence and sustainable agrarian reform. The committee indicated today that they would recommend an amendment to the property clause in the Constitution. Agri SA sees this as an unacceptable outcome of an extended consultation process wherein Agri SA took a firm stance against EWC. Agri SA clearly articulated on several occasions the serious consequences of such a step. “We have made extensive preparations in order to act effectively and will cast additional resources to this fight,” says Dan Kriek, Agri SA President. “Agri SA believes in constructive dialogue with all stakeholders, but now is the time to draw a line.” Agri SA will in the coming days: - Roll out its legal strategy and consult with its legal team on possible litigation; - Intensify dialogue with local and international role-players including American and European trade partners; - Review the procedural and administrative law compliance of the Constitutional Review Committee’s consultation process; - Strengthen and mobilise strategic partnerships with various organisations. The proposed amendment is politically motivated and will cause large scale damage to the South African economy. The priority for millions of South Africans is job creation, housing, crime prevention and quality education. This should be the focus of government, rather than reckless and populist constitutional amendments. “Agri SA continuously consults with lawyers and we are considering litigation,” said Annelize Crosby, Agri SA Policy Head: Land. “The recommendation is only the first step in a long and arduous process to amend the Constitution and related legislation.  Agri SA will be continue to stand its ground throughout the process.” Agri SA will continue to fight tooth and nail to ensure a sustainable future for all involved in agriculture as well as all South Africans. Issued by Thea Liebenberg, Media Liasion Officer, Agri SA, 15 November 2018