Modimolle- Mookgophong: MONCs a smokescreen to hide corruption 19 November 2018 The Democratic Alliance in Limpopo held a media briefing today regarding the circumstances around the filing of a Motion of No Confidence in the Mayor of the Modimolle-Mookgophong Municipality, Marlene van Staden, by the ANC and a Motion of No Confidence in the mayor, Speaker Solly Motshwene and Chief Whip, Hercules Louw by the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). These motions come at a time of the imminent release of a forensic audit investigation preliminary report into financial maladministration over the last two years and the EFF’s attempt to stop the bid adjudication of MIG projects. The intention behind these motions are even more suspicious given that there are no valid reasons given by either of these parties for their decision to table these motions of no confidence at this particular point in time. We have also learnt of the ANC led Limpopo Provincial Executive intention to dissolve the Modimolle-Mookgophong municipal council in terms of section 139(1)(c) of the Constitution which gives them the power to do so in "exceptional circumstances". This intention points to an ANC that is determined to use its Provincial authority for narrow political means and to stop the DA fight against corruption by all means. The DA and its partners have managed to make a lot of progress in the last two years (find attached government milestones reached). Some of these achievements include: We ensured the electrification of 500 houses in Ext 13 Ward 6 Phagameng, the installation of bulk water and sewerage infrastructure to more than 1000 RDP houses in Mookgophong and newly built structures with a toilet and small basin in the yards of 284 RDP houses in Pomolong. The Lillian Ngoyi bridge was completed after the project was stalled for more than 5 years. Calling for a Forensic Investigation into the municipalities finances. Calls that resulted into an investigation into corruption at the Mookgophong Traffic and Licensing office and led to arrests, disciplinary hearings and a resignation. Under the DA’s leadership a Tourism Association was started for the newly formed municipality to unlock the region’s amazing potential. A new and fair employment policy was passed and implemented by the Council.  This meant the employment for CWP, EPWP or for any other contract was taken out of the hands of the corrupt ANC Ward councillors and given to the DA Chief Whip and party whips together so that for the first time ever the process became transparent and fair. The municipality created a Financial Recovery Plan which is aimed at improving the municipality’s finances with the help of the Provincial government. This after the ANC left the municipality finances in disarray. Installed free WI-FI at the Alma Municipality Building, Alma Laerskool and the Library in Modimolle. The DA views these motions as nothing more than a desperate attempt by the ANC and the EFF to cover up alleged corruption and to remove a DA-led administration that is showing the people of Modimolle-Mookgophong what is possible under a DA government that is committed to good governance. The DA led government in the municipality has managed to achieve a lot in the last two years and we will continue to fight to improve the lives of people in Modimolle-Mookgophong and for more change. We will do this regardless of the attempts of the ANC/EFF coalition of corruption that is only concerned with self-enrichment to disrupt the progress we have made. Issued by Jacques Smalle, DA Limpopo Premier Candidate, 19 November 2018