Matlosana: ANC has no plan for the people 13 November 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Matlosana has today again witnessed a recurring theme that has collapsed any prospect of good governance City of Matlosana and robbed the community of quality basic service delivery due to the failing ANC. During a special council meeting this morning, where a new mayor was to be elected, the failing ANC nominated two candidates – one from the “Zuma camp” and the other from the “Ramaphosa camp”. In the end, council Speaker, Cllr Washington Ntozini, was elected as the new Mayor. He defeated the previous Mayor who was removed by a Vote of No Confidence brought by the DA. The division was even more clear in the public gallery where ANC supporters, dressed in party regalia, formed two separate groups chanting insults at the opposing mayoral candidates and at each other. Pepper spray, whose origin is yet to be ascertained, was used after chaos erupted in the public gallery. It is very concerning how this spray found its way into the building, despite the high-risk searches that were conducted on everyone who entered the building. Governance and service delivery in Matlosana has collapsed while the failing ANC puts itself before the people. Of major concern is that even Premier Job Mokgoro has no vision or plan to bring stability and growth to North West communities. The Premier, like most failing ANC members, remains focused on putting out fires triggered by opposing ANC factions. The cracks within the failing ANC can no longer be concealed as the power struggle between the Ramaphosa and Zuma factions continues to widen. The failing ANC is at war with itself and the people. Only a DA-led government can bring the necessary change and interventions needed to fix what the failing ANC has broken. The people of North West are in need of an accountable government that will put people’s interests first. The North West needs change that builds One South Africa for All. Only the DA can bring this change. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 13 November 2018