DA calls for Health MEC to act on death due to negligence 28 November 2018 Gauteng Health MEC Gwen Ramokgopa needs to investigate and take action regarding the death of a young man who lay injured for four hours at the Goba Clinic in Katlehong which did not have oxygen and the ambulance came too late to save him. At a sitting of the Gauteng Legislature yesterday I read out the Facebook post of Thando Khanya Mahlangu who details the incident in what he calls “the worst day of my life” (see full posting below). His younger brother was hit by a speeding car on Saturday 24 November and rushed to Goba Clinic, but they had no oxygen. An ambulance arrived after two hours but the paramedics were not sufficiently trained to assist, and another ambulance had to be called. Mahlangu writes as follows: “I blame the Gauteng health department coz they've failed us, how can a clinic have no oxygen? this shows nobody cares about us, and why wouldn't they release another ambulance if the first one was being delayed? Do these people even Understand the word “Emergency”? No I doubt. My brother had 4 hours and possibly 1000 chances to survive but because of the delays we lost him. This really damaged me and I doubt I’ll ever recover.” This heart-breaking story is unfortunately quite common as ambulances are generally slow, paramedics are not properly trained and clinics run short of basic necessities like oxygen. I have written to MEC Ramokgopa requesting her to investigate this incident and take the required action. Lives should not be lost because of the continuing failure of the Gauteng Health Department to provide a decent health service. Facebook Post Thando KhanYa Mahlangu is feeling heartbroken. 24 November 2018 — The worst day of my life So it happened, around 09:20 my younger brother was hit by a speeding car and he was rushed to Goba clinic which is a minute away from the scene and he was immediately attended. I was informed and I also got there at around 09:25 and he was already in the emergency room bleeding heavily and struggling to breathe not responding at all. That's where all things got messy, The clinic had no Oxygen we were told the ambulance is coming. We waited an hour there was no ambulance we kept asking about its whereabouts we got no answers. We started panicking and decided to call the ambulance whilst we were inside the clinic they told us they can’t send the ambulance for a person who’s already inside the emergency room thenurses should call it and there were no ambulances available. Another hour goes by still no ambulance, we drove to Hlahatsi to fetch the ambulance after we requested to take him to the hospital by ourselves and they said they are not allowed to release the patient unless they leave by an ambulance and we got the same response. After 2 hours the ambulance appeared travelling at a very low speed, no siren and the driver was on the phone. We were so relieved to see them and he would be rushed to the hospital for a better treatment but little did we know the worst was about to happen, The paramedics who arrived were not trained for patients who were so badly injured we were told so they had to call another ambulance that meant more delays. To cut the long story short the other paramedics after another hour arrived too late coz on their arrival my brother gave up on life. The nurses from Goba clinic tried their best to save his life. I blame the Gauteng health department coz they've failed us, how can a clinic have no oxygen? this shows nobody cares about us, and why wouldn't they release another ambulance if the first one was being delayed? Do these people even Understand the word “Emergency”? No, I doubt. My brother had 4 hours and possibly 1000 chances to survive but because of the delays we lost him. This really damaged me and I doubt ill ever recover. Issued by Jack Bloom, DA Gauteng Shadow Health MEC, 28 November 2018