Ramaphosa refuses to put South Africa first over Jacob Zuma 30 November 2018 The State and former President Jacob Zuma’s lawyers have today agreed that his application for permanent stay of prosecution will be heard in May next year. It is inconceivable that yet again the people’s money will be wasted to fund another one of Jacob Zuma’s frivolous court battles. The Democratic Alliance (DA) maintains that Zuma should have his day in court and should fund this on his own. This postponement will mean that once again, Zuma’s lifeline has been extended instead of facing the criminal charges against him. It is our belief that President Cyril Ramaphosa should have made it clear and publicly endorsed the NPA’s bid to oppose this application. He would not be interfering with the process of the judiciary, however, would be making it clear that his government would want to see former President Zuma face prosecution. However, we know that President Ramaphosa would be reluctant to support the NPA on this matter, because Zuma is the centre of the ANC’s campaign in KwaZulu-Natal. Ramaphosa is quick to talk tough on corruption, yet when it comes to Zuma, he goes above and beyond to use the people’s money to pay for Zuma’s next lifeline. This is proof that Ramaphosa prioritises the interests of his party above the interests of the country. Just recently, reports emerged that Ramaphosa has approved Zuma’s application for funding to the state attorney to defend himself at the Zondo Commission. This is a massive insult to the people of this country who still bear the brunt of the failing ANC’s legacy of the past 25 years. The DA has, for over a decade, fought tooth and nail to ensure that Zuma not only has his rightful day in court, but also pays his own legal fees defending himself. These cases alone have already cost the public purse R15 million in legal fees while the ANC leadership- including Ramaphosa himself- propped him up and defended him for years. The failing ANC’s dogged defence of Jacob Zuma is an insult to South Africans. The DA is committed to building One South Africa for All where all those who are found guilty of corruption spends a minimum of 15 years behind bars. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA National Spokesperson, 30 November 2018