Magashule associates still “hard at work” in the Free State 13 November 2018 It was reported that, during the local government Lekgotla in Bloemfontein last week, Mr Thuso Ramaema, the Deputy-Director-General in the office of the premier, indicated that the root cause of poor municipal performance in the Free State is corruption, fraud, political interference, infighting, instability and skills shortages. This appears to be an acknowledgement that local governments have deteriorated to a state of collapse over the last decade under the premiership of Ace Magashule and towards the end of his term under his appointee the former MEC for Cooperative Government and Traditional Affairs, the current Premier Sisi Ntombela. We are all aware that the office of the premier has been the prime example and custodian of the exact behaviour that Mr Ramaema refers to. Now the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Mr Zweli Mkize comes to the Free State to announce, at the same Lekgotla, that the right people with the appropriate skills must be appointed in municipalities. We all know that the failing ANC’s cadre deployment policy is responsible for the lack of skills and patronage network that is the centre of all the vices spelt out by Mr Ramaema. It was Magashule as former failing ANC Free State chairperson who, through his crony based cadre deployment, is responsible for the collapse of governance across the Free State provincial government and municipalities. The same Magashule whom the failing ANC has now made the custodian of cadre deployment at a national level. The same Magashule who, last week, referred to the former Mayor of Maluti-a-Phofung, the worst performing municipality in the country, as “the only person whom I know to be a hard worker from the province”. Vusi Tshabalala remains at the centre of various allegations of corruption. Like Magshule, this “hard worker’ is a warlord of note and his soul mate of vice. Magashule and his associates are obviously still hard at work in the Free State province. Hard at work to ensure that all the reasons for the failure of governance as mentioned by Mr Ramaema remain the order of the day. The failing ANC continues to use our people as voting fodder, while lining their own pockets and feeding their endless greed that makes poor people poorer. Where the DA governs people’s lives improve through greater access to opportunities that an investment friendly service delivery administration offers. Only the DA can bring real changes to the lives of people in the Free State. Our people deserve change that puts them first, stops corruption and speeds up the delivery of services. Only the DA can bring the kind of change that builds One South Africa for All. Issued by James Letuka, DA MPL, 13 November 2018