The usually astute Prof Milton Shain falls hook line and sinker for the PC-brigade who has called President Trump a racist, sexist, misogynist, homophobe, Islamophobe, anti-Semite and bigot just about every day. Singing from the same tribal hymn sheet, the Democrats and Mainstream Media’s use of these expletives does not make them true. Since Trump took office, the White House has hosted Black and Hispanic small businesses, a recent Black Youth Leadership Summit of 400 young black people, a wide variety of schools, Veterans, Black leaders of faith, and so on. No bigot will attract these groups to the White House if he really were a Nazi, Hitler, or a White Supremacist – labels routinely called by the Unhinged Left. Obama had more Hollywood soirees at the WH than Trump who unlike his predecessor has made the WH a magnet attracting people who matter. That’s why Hollywood hates Trump. Linking Trump to an anti-Semitic massacre is a low blow especially since my learned friend adduces no evidence whatsoever. Trump is one of the most pro-Israel and pro-Jewish presidents in American history. He has done much behind the scenes to promote peace in the Middle East, attested to by his bold initiative to move the American Embassy to Jerusalem. When he said that there were some good people in the Charlottesville march, he referred to those in the march who were not white supremacists, but who protested against the removal of statues and the desecration of the flag. The claim that “words matter and have consequences” has become the latest silencing trope at a time when democracy needs more, not less, robust debate. Having lost their vision as a loyal opposition, the DEMS increasingly frown upon criticism, dissent and public dialogue. Stalinists hate rational discourse silencing dissent by calling their political opponents racists, sexists, misogynists, Nazis and Hitler. Having spent most of his life at the University of Cape Town, Shain knows where this kind of tyranny ends and what happens to those who dare to question the conventional wisdoms. If Prof Shain had surfed the net, he would see photos of Trump before he became president with the Hollywood elite such as Spike Lee, Oprah Winfrey, and prominent black leaders like Rev Sharpton, Rev Jesse Jackson, sports and soccer stars of every stripe. Trump himself said, I was never called a racist until I ran for office. Prior to that many politicians came cap-in-hand for party funds. Even Bill Clinton once advised Trump to run for office. Yes, believe it or not, Trump was an equal opportunity donor. Residing in this country for ten months I have been appalled at the mainstream media’s false representation of Trump. They still cannot accept that they failed to predict Trump’s electoral victory, let alone his actual win. Hand in glove with the Clintons, the Democrat Elite, and the spouses of senior DEMS heading up the major news networks, the mainstream media was more than convinced that crooked Hillary Clinton would win. Not because she ran a great campaign but because they knew “The Fix” was in, orchestrated rather clumsily by the FBI, the CIA, the mainstream media and the Democrats – that H Clinton would win. Is it therefore too much to expect Prof Milton Shain to know about this plot to unseat candidate Donald J Trump, spearheaded by none other than the Clinton Campaign and FBI operatives loyal to the Clintons and the Obamas? His job as academic is to dig and find proof for his mealy mouthed assertions. The so-called “Russian Collusion” in Trump’s election is the biggest hoax concocted by the left-wing conspiratorial trifecta. Intellectuals across the globe either wilfully ignore or are ignorant of this massive Clinton plot to unseat Donald Trump. As a matter of principle, Trump attacks only those who attack him unjustly. He ridicules them and uses his tweets rather effectively to communicate directly with the people. His tweets are the most powerful weapon against an activist media that has lost all credibility with the nation. Problem is – the mainstream media, the Democrats and Hollywood hate Trump, more than they care about America. Their attacks are relentless not because they want him to fail; they worry that he might succeed. Prof Shain’s binary view of Trump and the Republicans as the baddies and their political opponents as knights in shining armour is as unscholarly and dated as his views about Trump, Fox News and Rush Limbaugh. The DEMS are no better than the ANC. They have an armed wing called Antifa that has wreaked havoc against Republicans, smashing up Republican protests, violently opposing conservative speakers on campuses (very much like the Fees Must Fall Stalinists in SA), and who regularly hounds Republican politicians and conservatives at their homes, restaurants, in their offices and public places. What Prof Shain needs to know, the Democratic Alliance in SA will never undermine democracy the way the DEMS do here in the USA on a regular basis. I would advise him to familiarize himself political currents of the day instead of repeating the boring talking points that often have no substance in reality. The struggle in America is no longer between Left and Right. It is between America and Socialism, the latter romanticised by American academia, as ignorant of Marxism as the South African intelligentsia and intellectuals are of American politics. Rhoda Kadalie