President Ramaphosa, fire corrupt ministers too if you are serious about clean governance President Cyril Ramaphosa must show decisive leadership and genuine commitment to addressing the corruption, maladministration and incompetence that is stifling the performance of his Cabinet by firing Ministers who are in breach of their oath of office. Dismissing Tom Moyane from his post as South African Revenue Service Commissioner was an easy win for President Cyril Ramaphosa. He must now turn his attention to ministers Malusi Gigaba, Bathabile Dlamini, Nomvula Mokonyane, Zweli Mkhize and others who have all betrayed their mandate to serve South Africans. The Constitutional Court confirmed Gigaba lied under oath and violated the Constitution in the “Fireblade matter”, while the same court had to ask the National Prosecuting Authority to consider whether Dlamini should be prosecuted for lying under oath following the testimony she gave at Judge Bernard Ngoepe’s inquiry into the social grants crisis. On both these occasions, the DA acted to ensure that these officials are held accountable. The ANC, as always, shielded their own by turning a blind eye to these infractions. Mokonyane’s disastrous tenure as Minister of Water and Sanitation was underscored by scandals including a mismanaged R3 billion water project that was meant to produce 15 000 artisans over three years. Gross mismanagement at the Department resulted in over 2 000 trainees being unable to complete their studies. Instead of holding Mokonyane accountable, Ramaphosa protected her by moving her to the Department of Communications. The Water and Sanitation Department remains hampered by the mismanagement and alleged corruption Mokonyane presided over. Just yesterday, ANC Treasurer-General Paul Mashatile admitted that the party received a R2 million “donation” from scandal-plagued VBS Mutual Bank after a report on Sunday said Mkhize had requested the money from the bank during his tenure as treasurer-general in exchange for helping VBS raise funds from municipalities and state institutions. Money looted from VBS has cost individuals, families and communities dearly and has affected service delivery in some of South Africa’s poorest municipalities. We have called on the ANC to pay back the money it received from VBS. It seems the DA is the only party that takes accountability seriously. The governing ANC has repeatedly failed to show leadership in that regard, always waiting on the judiciary, the Public Protector or pressure from the DA before acting against their corrupt politicians. Ramaphosa’s promise of a “New Dawn” is an empty one as he is failing to nip corruption and maladministration in the bud by removing these ministers. The DA has cemented its reputation as an anti-corruption party and is not afraid to tackle it head-on. In our quest to build One South Africa for All, we will continue to expose the ANC graft that continues to oppress our people. Statement issued by Solly Malatsi MP, DA National Spokesperson, 2 November 2018