Hawks' Bosasa investigation to be finalised by December 27 November 2018 The long arm of the law is within reach of Bosasa – the company under investigation for corruption, which made a R500 000 donation to President Cyril Ramaphosa's campaign to become president of the ANC last year. "If not finalised this month, [the investigation] will be finalised next month," Hawks head Lieutenant General Godfrey Lebeya, told the Portfolio Committee on Police on Tuesday. During the period of 2004 to 2007, the Department of Correctional Services awarded four tenders to companies within the Bosasa Group of Companies to the value of R1.6bn, read Lebeya's presentation to the committee. "The services were to be rendered between 2004 and 2007, but they were extended over a period of time." "It is alleged that [an] official from correctional services received gratification from Bosasa." The Hawks are investigating charges of fraud, corruption, contravention of the Public Finance Management Act and money laundering. Directors and officials from Bosasa and former officials of the Department of Correctional Services are involved. The Hawks have obtained more than 610 statements, but a final forensic report and warning statements are still outstanding, he said. Two weeks ago, Ramaphosa backtracked on a response he gave before the National Assembly over a R500 000 payment from Bosasa CEO Gavin Watson, allegedly for the benefit of his son, Andile. The October 2017 payment was actually a donation towards his ANC presidential campaign, which Ramaphosa said was made without his knowledge. This emerged in a letter Ramaphosa drafted to the speaker of the National Assembly, dated November 14, which stated that he inadvertently provided incorrect information in his response to a question from DA leader Mmusi Maimane. Earlier this year, News24 revealed that several high-ranking ANC members in government and Parliament received of Bosasa's largesse, including ANC MP Vincent Smith. The company is believed to have government contracts worth R10bn. Lebeya also cited other high-profile cases that were still under investigation. A fraud case related to VBS Mutual Bank, involving R1.5bn, is currently being probed. Seventy-one statements have been taken. The Hawks also received four dockets relating to the Steinhoff saga and eight statements had been taken, he said. He said the life cycle of the various cases that make up "state capture" investigations could take anywhere between two to 10 years to complete. News24