Parliamentary debate on peace and stability only highlights how much South Africa has deteriorated 13 November 2018 In the Preamble of South Africa's Constitution, the importance of a quality life for all South Africans as well as the opportunity to reach their full potential is highlighted. Thus, the need for a parliamentary debate on the lack of peace and stability in our country only goes to show how things have deteriorated under the ANC government. The truth is that the country and its people have drifted further and further away from peace and stability and the population's needs are completely disregarded. Under ANC leadership, an environment was created in which each person tries to get as much as possible out of the system for him or herself at the expense of everyone else. This self-destructive attitude that has permeated all levels of our society did not just fall from the sky. It raises the question of where this attitude of entitlement and egoism came from. What kind of moral framework permits theft, corruption, self-enrichment, murder and chaos? At present, these seem to be characteristic of our country. And that is how the international community sees South Africa, even our neighbouring countries hold this view. These rotten fruits are rooted in the immoral leadership that have set the tone and example for our society. Ever since the day that it came into power, the ANC has been looting the state coffers by means of cadre deployment and Black Economic Empowerment (BEE). Poor policy decisions only made the problem worse and now the country finds itself at the fiscal edge of an economic implosion. While the rest of the developing world is progressing, South Africa nearly has more unemployed than employed citizens. This is the ANC's doing as the party is intellectually so drained that it is marching to the hollow beat of the 6% EFF party. The ANC is unable to formulate a coherent policy without looking around to see what the EFF is doing. It is a case of the blind leading the blind into a disaster like Venezuela where people are eating their pet animals just to survive. In order to draw the attention away from their impracticable policy, the ANC and the EFF are resorting to racial polarisation. The rash statements made by the EFF against whites and other minorities have now finally lead to assault in Parliament. The question is how long before that attitude spills over to society in general? It is possible to create a better future for all in our country, but then policies that will stimulate the economy must be effectively implemented. At this stage, however, it is impossible due to the obstructive and destructive nature of the ANC and the EFF. The time has come for those who are breaking our country down to be replaced by a coalition government that will put the interests of South Africans first. The FF Plus will be part of such a government. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson, 13 November 2018