KZN SAPS ban: DA holds break-through meeting with Acting Commissioner 12 November 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has today held a breakthrough meeting with KZN SAPS Acting Commissioner, Lieutenant-General Mkhwanazi, following the recent alleged banning of public representatives, including Members of the Provincial Legislature (MPLs), from access to SAPS stations in the province. Last month the Acting Commissioner issued a circular to all SAPS station and cluster commanders in which he stated that MPs and MPLs should not be allowed access and that parliamentary portfolios committees must first obtain permission from the Provincial Police Headquarters before inspections. Following today’s meeting with the Acting Commissioner, the DA is able to announce the following resolutions: - Political party structures are prohibited from conducting oversight visits at SAPS facilities. - Members of the Provincial Legislature and Parliament can continue to conduct oversight visit as part of their Constitutional obligations. These are set out in Sections 55(2), 114(2) and 206(3) of the South African Constitution. These oversight inspections may be announced or unannounced and; - The Acting Police Commissioner will ensure that all cluster and station commanders would be advised of this. One of the Acting Commissioner’s biggest worries relates to security at SAPS stations. The DA understands this concern and it has been agreed that when MPs and MPLs conduct their oversight inspections they should present their Legislature IDs to the most senior person at the SAPS facilities. In addition, the DA will engage with the Speaker's Office to ensure that all public facilities are provided with a list of Members details. We will also request that the Speaker’s Office look at ways in which the current card system can be improved upon in order to prevent the use of fraudulent identification. Today’s meeting is a landmark one. It shows what can be achieved through communication and teamwork. It is also a victory for the people of KZN who deserve to know how professional their police force is. Most notable throughout this entire episode is KZN Community Safety MEC, Mxolisi Kaunda’s silence. This is representative of a failing ANC that does not believe in transparency. The DA remains committed to fighting for a safer South Africa where people know they have the protection of an honest and professional police service. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango, DA KZN Leader, 12 December 2018