 ___STEADY_PAYWALL___ 14 November 2018 Dear Speaker, CORRECTION TO QUESTION FOR ORAL REPLY I wish to draw your attention to the fact that during my appearance in the National Assembly when I was answering questions on 6 November 2018, I inadvertently provided incorrect information in reply to a supplementary question. Following my response to Question 19 on VBS Mutual Bank, the Leader of the Opposition asked me about a payment that had been made on behalf of a Mr Gavin Watson to my son, Mr Andile Ramaphosa. My reply to the question was based on the information that was at my disposal at the time, regarding a business relationship that my son's company has with the company African Global Operations. It is true that my son's company does indeed have a contract with African Global Operations for the provision of consultancy services. The said consultancy services are provided by my son's company to African Global Operations in a number of African countries other than South Africa. He informed me that South Africa was specifically excluded to avoid a potential conflict of interest. Since my reply in the National Assembly, I have sought to get more information regarding this matter. I have been subsequently informed that the payment referred to in the supplementary question by the Leader of Opposition does not relate to that contract. I have been told that the payment to which the Leader of the Opposition referred was made on behalf of Mr Gavin Watson into a trust account that was used to raise funds for a campaign established to support my candidature for the Presidency of the African National Congress. The donation was made without my knowledge. I was not aware of the existence of the donation at the time that I answered the question in the National Assembly. I thought it best to furnish this information to clear any confusion. I kindly request that you bring my letter to the attention of the Members of the National Assembly. Yours sincerely, Mr Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa President of the Republic of South Africa Ms Baleka Mbete Speaker of the National Assembly Parliamentof Republic of South Africa PO Box 15 Cape Town 8000 Issued by Parliament, 16 November 2018 Click here to sign up as a Politicsweb FC supporter. 