Bobani’s bank account inspected, says attorney Mr Bantu Holomisa, MP UDM President The United Democratic Movement (UDM) has noted that Nelson Mandela Bay (NMB) Executive Mayor Mongameli Bobani’s attorneys, Danie Gouws Attorneys, have, after inspecting his bank accounts, found that there is nothing untoward in his personal bank account or that he received any kind of irregular payment/s from Heerkos Projects. The allegations made in the media, in particular The Herald, pertain to the NMB Integrated Public Transport System (IPTS) and alleged payments to Bobani by one Fareed Fakir’s company, Heerkos Projects. The Party shall henceforth be guided by the outcome of the Hawks’ investigation into the IPTS. The UDM will only act if the National Prosecuting Authority finds prima facie evidence of corruption involving Mr Bobani. For more details read today’s email from the Danie Gouws Attorneys: Dear General, Our telephonic conversation of this morning refers. As discussed , we act on behalf of and in accordance with instructions received from Mayor Bobani of Port Elizabeth. It is of upmost importance to bring to your attention that the search and seizure warrant contains allegations of the honourable mayor receiving monies from a certain company. One must keep in mind that these are mere allegations which are baseless unfounded and untested. It merely forms part of an ongoing invest into the IPTS funds. It is our specific instructions from our client that no funds were paid into his personal bank account at any stage from this Company.Our offices had insight into Mr Bobani's personal bank accounts and nothing untoward was noticed in this regard. Our offices also contacted the senior prosecutor in the matter, who confirmed that Mr Bobani is not a suspect at this stage of the investigation. The media, especially the Herald newspaper , has created the impression that the warrant specifically states that Bobani received monies from a company and which was paid into his personal bank account. This is untrue and without any merit. Mr Bobani is currently trialed by media and it is our opinion that certain opposing political parties are playing a major role in this . Furthermore as discussed , Mr Bobani's bank statements will be handed over for forensic analysis tomorrow by a chartered accountant appointed by our offices. Please note that we shall forward the above correspondence on our formal letterhead as soon as possible. We trust that the above-mentioned is in order and you are welcome to contact writer hereof at any stage, should you have any further queries relating hereto. Yours faithfully Danie Gouws  Director Gouws Attorneys ENDS Issued by Mr Bantu Holomisa, MP, UDM President, 4 November 2018