AfriForum supports victim’s family against international corporate bully Ford AfriForum announced today that Adv. Gerrie Nel, Head of the civil rights organisation’s Private Prosecution Unit, and his team had been supporting the Jimmy family against Ford Motor Company. Reshall Jimmy burnt to death in December 2015 when the Ford Kuga he was driving caught fire. “The family has been waiting for almost four years for the case to be investigated. AfriForum wrote numerous letters requesting that a formal inquest should take place that would look into the circumstances around and cause of the victim’s death. The Jimmy family finally received a notice from the Registrar of the Western Cape High Court that the inquest will be held on 4 February 2019 and that the pre-trail discussions will soon start,” Nel states. Nel says that they are happy that the process is finally commencing. "It has been a very traumatic time for the family, who are desperate for closure. We will disclose our views and experiences with Ford and their legal teams in the next week or two – specifically Ford's expressed attitude towards their customers,” Nel continues. “Advocate Gerrie Nel and his team were instrumental in helping our family to fight for an inquest into my brother's death. His persistence made this inquest date possible. Our battle with Ford to come forward with the truth about the circumstances around the fire has been going on for years, and as a family we are not prepared to give up on the fight," says Renisha Jimmy, the victim’s sister. “All our interactions with Ford over the last three years – during which we urged them to disclose their findings, which to date they have refused to do – can now be compelled by the High Court. We are very confident that the appropriate conclusions and findings will be made,” Jimmy says. AfriForum’s Private Prosecution Unit will be overseeing the inquest to ensure that justice is served. Statement issued by Adv. Gerrie Nel, Head: Private Prosecution Unit, AfriForum, 2 November 2018