Ugu still not declared a local disaster area despite water crisis 14 June 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has written to the KZN Premier Willies Mchunu requesting a full status report on the promised proclamation of the Ugu District as a local disaster area. The DA would also like a copy of the alleged agreement signed between municipal workers and the Ugu District Municipality. The DA is concerned about the secrecy around the signed agreement. Over the past three years there have been numerous failed agreements and we feel residents and public representatives deserve to know the details of this agreement. The Ugu District Municipality has still not been officially declared a local disaster area as promised by the Premier despite vast areas still not having water reconnected nor water tanker deliveries. None of the additional outside support in terms of security officers, water tankers or engineering support has arrived. Residents continue to demand answers from Ward councillors but the municipality is not providing the councillors with any information regarding tanker schedules and timeframes. There is also no updates on the numerous sabotage charges that were laid with the police. The water crisis in this municipality is untenable. Vital healthcare at Murchison Hospital have been scaled back to such an extent it has been placed under administration by the National Department of Health. Numerous schools have remained closed. Hundreds of the elderly at frailcare centres have been put at risk. This is not just a problem in urban areas. Residents in rural areas such as Izingolweni, Gcilima, KwaXolo and Murchison have gone months without an adequate water supply. The DA commends all its councillors who have been on the ground with NGOs providing water to those who struggle. As DA we continue to fight for all resident's right to access water. We reaffirm the DA's call that the Ugu District Municipality be declared a local disaster area and placed under Section 139 administration. Issued by Rishigen Viranna, Ugu Constituency Head, 14 June 2018