Statement of the special NWC of the ANC on the nomination of Premier candidate in the North West Province 21 June 2018 The ANC National Working Committee (NWC) met in a Special Session on Wednesday 20th June 2018 as per the directive of the Special NEC held on 18th June 2018 to conclude on the nomination of Premier-Elect for the North West Province following the resignation of Former Premier Supra Mahumapelo last month. The Special NWC unanimously resolved on the nomination of Professor Job Mokgoro as Premier-Elect for the North West Province. Professor Mokgoro is a tried and tested administrator fit enough to deal with the challenges at hand including creating stability within the provincial administration and effecting the much needed delivery of basic services. Professor Mokgoro is currently responsible for the School of Governance in the North West Provincial Administration, with an outstanding history of service in South Africa. Professor Makgoro holds a number of administrative and academic accolades including a Masters and Honorary Doctorate in Public Administration from the University of Toledo in the United States. In April 1994 Professor Mokgoro became the first Director-General of the North West Administration tasked with rationalising and integrating three government administrations into one North West province. From the end of 1999 until January 2003, Professor Mokgoro served as the Director-General of the South African Management Development Institute. Professor Mokgoro’s Profile will be made available on our online platforms for ease of reference STATUS UPDATE ON REGIONAL AND PROVINCIAL CONFERENCES LIMPOPO The Special NEC of 18th June 2018 received and welcomed a report on the preparation towards the Limpopo Provincial Conference which is expected to take place from 22nd June 2018. We are committed to assisting the province to ensure a successful provincial conference. The Special NEC noted the work being done by the Provincial Dispute Resolution Committee and NEC Deployees to resolve complaints and disputes with affected structures and ANC members in Limpopo, and urged that these processes be concluded and decisions communicated to structures before the Provincial conference sits. KWAZULU-NATAL The Special NEC noted that the challenges in the province could be resolved, in line with the mandate of the 54th National Conference. The Special NEC directed the National Dispute Resolution Committee (NDRC) to continue work with the PTT to address the issues raised by members who interdicted the Provincial Conference. In this regard, it would be possible to render the legal contestation redundant. The fundamental objective is to unite the organisation in pursuit of the core objective of the ANC which is to build a better life for all, especially the poor. The Special NEC agreed that the PTT, working with the National Officials and the NEC deployees will ensure that the KZN Provincial Conference, when it sits before the end of July, focuses on substantive issues of social transformation, organisational renewal and a decisive victory in the elections. The Special NEC noted the good work done by the PTT, NEC and the NDRC and further encouraged all involved to continue on the path of unity and renewal. GAUTENG The Special NEC noted and welcomed the report on preparations for the Provincial and Regional Conferences expected to all have convened on or before the end of July 2018. The Special NEC noted the work done by the Gauteng PEC working together with NEC Deployees in attending to disputes and complains and accordingly encourage all our structures to subject themselves to internal processes of the organization in seeking solutions to disputes. Gauteng Regional Conferences will be held between the weekend of 29th June - 1st July 2018 and the weekend of 6th - 8th July 2018, the Gauteng Provincial Conference is expected to be held by the end of July  2018. ON THE USE OF THE JUDICIARY TO FIGHT INTERNAL ANC PROCESSES The Special NEC affirmed its commitment to the measures for internal dispute resolution as set out in the ANC Constitution and Resolutions adopted by 54th National Conference at all levels. It implored responsible leadership structures and collectives at all levels to abide by the letter and spirit of the ANC Constitution, in how they oversee and run organisational processes, and give ANC members the space to be heard and to raise their grievances and complaints. It urges members to utilize internal processes. Issued by ANC Secretary General Cde Ace Magashule, 21 June 2018