'Never forget the 2015 generation, as we celebrate the youth of 1976' - Malema EFF leader Julius Malema on Saturday said the 2015 #feesmustfall activists should be remembered and celebrated. Speaking at a Youth Day rally at the Motlosana Stadium in Jouberton Location in Klerksdorp, Malema said the 2015 #feesmustfall student activists must be heralded on youth day, along with those of 1976. "We must never forget the 2015 generation, as we celebrate the 1976 generation," he said. Malema said education should not be a commodity but a right for all. "All of us must have access to education." About the youth of 1976, Malema said, "The blood that was split was of innocent black youth who were marching peacefully to protest an illegitimate government. "How do you open fire on teenage children in school uniform who are on a peaceful march who are protesting Afrikaans as a medium?  How much hatred in your heart must you have against them?" He said apartheid was built "on the deepest white feeling of black hate." Malema said now was the time to "honour ourselves as the current generation. Now is the time to determine our future, our future is in our hands!" He said the Bantu education curriculum was aimed at creating "zombies among black children." State-owned bank Malema then directed his speech to the business fraternity calling for a state-owned bank. "We need banks that are favourable and supportive of black people… the banks do not like black people… the system hates black people. "You need a government which is prepared to put money into innovation and brilliant ideas. "All of you here, unemployed young people, you have got ideas…your mind is liberated, you have got ideas, government must support your ideas." He said the government was not exercising its power. On land and mines, he said, "Go to school, because we are getting the land back. The land needs us to be educated, how will you work the land if you haven't gone to school. We are going to own the mines, they will no longer be owned by white people, but they need us to be educated…" On jobs for sex in government and the private sector, Malema said the practice should stop. "If you offer jobs for sex, it's rape, we must stop this thing. You must say, enough is enough, you must take your future into your own hands." On crime and femicide he said, "The theft that we see here is caused by hunger, our people are hungry. [Police Minister] Bheki Cele must fight crime, but he can only do so much when there is no bread on the table." He said South African men had declared war on South African women. News24 Malema reiterates support for Shivambu on Momonait matter EFF leader Julius Malema on Saturday reiterated his support for his chief whip Floyd Shivambu in the matter involving Treasury's director-general, Ismail Momoniat. "If Momo fought in the struggle he would have understood what Floyd said. A revolutionary would have known that when he went into prison, when he went into exile – he would know he was fighting for black people [if was predominantly for African people]." According to a Fin24 report, EFF chief whip Floyd Shivambu faced multiple rebukes for remarks he made in a committee meeting, where he questioned the presence of National Treasury's Momoniat. Shivambu reportedly asked why Momoniat attended finance oversight committee meetings, and allegedly accused him of having a superiority complex which did not allow him to take orders from African seniors. The committee and National Treasury in a statement then condemned Shivambu's remarks. In another committee meeting, Shivambu reportedly denied censoring Momoniat and demanded an apology from the committee's chair Yunus Carrim. Malema said, "Why is treasury always represented by an Indian when there is 80 percent African staff? Because there is a tendency [for] our Indian brothers to look down at Africans. "I found the leaders of the EFF – all of them queuing to explain themselves. I want to tell all those journalists who wanted to organise a mob that we are not scared of SARS or the police… We are not scared of the media, you tried to destroy us before - you failed." Malema then accused some Indian and coloured people of being racist and seeing themselves as more white than black. News24