SAPU calls for speedy Phahlane case 4 June 2018 The South African Policing Union has noted with grave concern the SAPS's delay in dealing with the disciplinary case of former acting national police commissioner Lieutenant-General Khomotso Phahlane. On Friday 1 June 2018 it was exactly a year that Lt-Gen. Phahlane was suspended from duty with full benefits. SAPU is gravely concerned that this delay looks as if we are creating another retired Lt-Gen. Richard Mdluli case who was suspended with full benefits for almost 7 years. SAPU calls upon the SAPS management to act swiftly in dealing with Lt-Gen. Phahlane’s disciplinary case. The SAPS disciplinary code is clear in terms of the due processes, period of the process etc. The case should have been concluded within a period of 90 days. It is either Lt-Gen. Phahlane is charged and sanctioned accordingly or if there is no case against him be allowed back into the service. The lengthy period of suspension whilst a person is enjoying full benefits makes us wonder who is failing to do his/her job. If the SAPS has nothing against the general let them swallow their pride and acknowledge that fact. We are extremely unhappy that this is a second- high ranking SAPS commander who is earning millions in taxpayers’ money whilst staying at home. The criminal case that Lt-Gen. Phahlane is going through has no bearing on the internal disciplinary case therefore the SAPS cannot claim to be waiting for the criminal case as they are separate issues. We condemn the apparent double standards that the SAPS is applying here. For functionary junior officers, the management would have acted with speed. It is even worse with our members because their suspension is largely without benefits. Mdluli was allowed to stay at home for over 7 years and ultimately given a golden handshake to retire. We will not allow such a situation with Lt-Gen. Phahlane. Its either he is facing the music internally within the prescribes period or allowed to earn his salary through offering his service to the police. Issued by Oscar Skommere, General Secretary, 4 June 2018