ANC rejects DA's amendment bill to sell alcohol in schools 27 June 2018 ANC Western Cape rejects the proposed ammendment bill by the DA MEC, Debbie Schaffer, to allow alcohol to be sold in schools as heavily misguided and dangerous. Western Cape is already suffering an  alcohol epidemic for reasons that are widely known, which is really surpising that instead of championing for alcohol free schools, communities, and province, the DA MEC is actually calling for more alcohol consumption. According to the DA's MEC of Health's last Budget vote, consequences of alcohol abuse are already putting ernomous burden on the healthcare budget to the tune of 17 billion. ANC would like to warn the MEC of the dire consequences if her amendment bill passes in a DA led Provincial Legislatue. Alcohol already has a terrible legacy of the Foetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) in the Western Cape. We have kids who are born with learning disabilities, bone and joint deformities, heart defects as result of their parents drinking during pregnancy. Alcohol also increases chances of HIV infections and causes higher rate of high school dropouts and other social ills. As the ANC, we know what alcohol consumption has already done in many communities. Specifically for schools we are worried that there are more consequences that seem to elude the DA MEC. Among these are; 1. Parents who cant handle alcohol 2. More alcohol will result to a need to have additional security at schools 3. There is a possibility of damage to school property 4. There will be drunken brawls and injuries 5. Matriculants who are of drinking age will watch their parents drinking and feel liberated to drink at school. This Bill should not have even been conceived, much less to be taken to the public for comment. This is a direct insult to the people whose struggle with alcohol is real and consequential. We reject this amendment as a reflection of MECs own exclusive enclave, a world of her buddies, and not a reflection of our communities at large. The people must reject this amendment, and this MEC. Issued by Faiez Jacobs, Provincial Secretary, ANC Western Cape, 27 June 2018