STATEMENT BY MINISTER ZWELI MKHIZE ON ALLEGATIONS PUBLISHED BY THE SUNDAY TIMES The allegations published by the Sunday Times newspaper today, 10 June 2018, about some R4,5 million “kickback” or “facilitation fee” that I am supposed to be seeking due to a loan that was granted to a company called Afric Oil by the Public Investment Corporation are a ridiculous and malicious fabrication. I have never facilitated the said loan negotiations nor have I sought any “facilitation fee” from the said company. It is extremely unacceptable and mischievous for my name to be dragged into a matter that I have nothing to do with in this manner. I am seeking legal advice. Update: MINISTER ZWELI MKHIZE TAKES EXCEPTION TO SUNDAY TIMES ARTICLE I have been made aware that the Sunday Times has published a story titled Zweli Mkhize linked to R4,5 million dodgy deal. It attempts to allege that I facilitated a loan from the Public Investment Corporation (PIC). I also received questions from the Sunday Times asking if I have any relationship with Zonkizizwe Investments and whether I facilitated a PIC loan for Afric Oil. I made it clear that I have never facilitated such a loan and I have no relationship with Zonkizizwe. This I still maintain. I have also now learnt through the article that there are lawyers who have instituted action against certain parties wherein my name is mentioned. To date I have not seen such a lawyer’s letter nor is there any action pending against me or by me on such a matter. I also have not been provided with a shred of evidence on when I facilitated this loan and who I engaged with in doing such facilitation. I deny having done any facilitation whatsoever for the granting of the Afric Oil loan at PIC. Interestingly enough, despite the Sunday Times establishing that there was a person who confirms having facilitated this PIC loan, the newspaper still elected to make the entire front page headline to revolve around me. This, I take exception to. In my view it can only be meant to tarnish and defame my name without much substance. This kind of journalism is not only sensational but also unprofessional. In my view it is an attempt to sell copies of the Sunday Times based on an enticing headline which is nothing but sensationalism which lacks substance. I reiterate, as said in my earlier statement, that I will immediately seek legal advice on how to deal with this matter and the recourse I can get. Once again I categorically deny having facilitated any PIC loan for Afric Oil. In my tenure as the ANC Treasurer General I met with various companies who would brief me on their operations, strategies or plans. This is no way meant that my intervention was required. At no stage did I enter into an agreement to facilitate loans for a fee. Statements issued by the Ministry of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, 10 June 2018