STATEMENT BY PRESIDENT RAMAPHOSA FOLLOWING THE UN SECURITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS The United Nations General Assembly has today, Friday, 8 June 2018, elected South Africa to serve in the United Nations Security Council for the term 2019-2020 as a non-permanent member. This will be the third time that South Africa will be serving in the Security Council since the dawn of democracy in 1994. We are humbled and honoured by the confidence the international community has demonstrated in our capability to contribute to the resolution of global challenges. We express our unreserved gratitude and appreciation to the Southern African Development Community (SADC) that nominated us and our continental body, the African Union (AU), that endorsed our candidature. The overwhelming support South Africa received from members of the United Nations is significant in the year of the centenary of the birth of our global icon and the founding father of our nation, President Nelson Mandela. This election comes after a unanimous resolution by members of the United Nations to convene a Global Peace Summit in honour of President Mandela to be held in September 2018. South Africa will use its membership of the United Nations Security Council in 2019 and 2020 to advance the interests of Africa, particularly the priorities of the the African Union Agenda 2063. South Africa’s tenure will be guided by our commitment to resolve regional, global and international conflicts and promote inclusive growth as part of the effort to ensure a better Africa in a better world. We are committed to addressing the root causes of conflict, including inequality and underdevelopment, and promoting inclusive political dialogue. South Africa remains deeply concerned about the emergence of unilateralism and its attendant threat to the International rules-based system. South Africa reaffirms the centrality of the United Nations Charter and the primacy of the United Nations Security Council on issues of international peace and security. We reaffirm our commitment to enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and sub-regional organisations in matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security. This will include the strengthening of effective partnerships between the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. We reaffirm our commitment to the peaceful resolution of global disputes and the advancement of inclusive development in accordance with the United Nations Charter and International Law. Statement issued by Khusela Diko, Spokesperson for The Presidency, 8 June 2018