18 Gauteng schools implicated in fraud and financial mismanagement 13 June 2018 The DA is shocked to learn that six schools have been implicated in fraud and 12 schools have been involved in financial mismanagement. This was revealed to me by the Gauteng Education MEC, Panyaza Lesufi, in a written reply to my questions in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. According to MEC Lesufi the following schools are implicated in fraud; Rotara School, President High School, Rosina Sedibane Modiba Sports School, Freeway Park Secondary School, Funeka Secondary School and Dr WK Du Plessis School. The school principals, deputy principals, SGB, administration clerks, finance officers and educators were involved in the fraudulent use of public money that was meant to be spent on our learners. The following table indicates the schools implicated and the amount of money that was defrauded from each school: Name of the schools Description of cases Rotara School Fraud of funds to the value of R103 326,66 President High School Leave fraud amounting to R129 230,27 Rosina Sedibane Modiba Sports School Fraud of R3 202 818,88 Freeway Park Secondary School Tender fraud to the value of R1 198 800,00 Funeka Secondary School Misappropriation of cash amounting to R1 950,00 and R9 947,00 in 2013 and 2014 Dr WK Du Plessis School Fraud of funds to the value of R1 196 537,90 Despite the fact that criminal charges have been laid against the perpetrators, the DA demands that those implicated must pay back the money. The schools that have been involved in the financial mismanagement of funds are; Hoerskool Linden, Leondale High School, Alra Park Primary School, Winnie Mandela Primary School, Masakhane Primary School, PS Fourie Primary School, Dr WF Nkomo Secondary School, Melodi Primary School, Drake Koka Primary School, TM Letlhake Primary School, Thutopele Secondary School and Glenvista High School. These cases involve failure to follow procurement procedures, renting out of the school buses without the knowledge of the SGB, issuing of loans to food handlers, failure to receipt school amounts and contravening finance policy. All these cases involve school principals and some Uniform Committee members who have since been charged with misconduct. It is highly concerning that the principals and the SGB who are mandated to look after the school’s finances are involved in fraud and financial mismanagement. The DA calls on the MEC to engage with principals, administration staff and SGBs on the proper and ethical handling of school funds to ensure that there is effective financial management at all our schools. Stealing from schools is stealing from the taxpayer and this is a crime; perpetrators must be brought to book. Issued by Khume Ramulifho, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 13 June 2018