DA calls for investigation into attempted illegal purchase of BMWs worth R5 million 20 June 2018 The DA has requested the Minister of Environmental Affairs, Dr Edna Molewa, to institute an internal investigation into the department’s involvement in the attempted illegal procurement of five BMWs, intended for delivery at the Gasegonyana local municipality. The recipients for whom the vehicles were procured, remains a mystery. The suspicious sale was abruptly brought to a halt in May this year after DA councillor, Willie Aucamp, caught wind of the fact that five BWM X5s had arrived in Upington for pre-delivery inspection. He immediately grew suspicious and warned the motor-vehicle dealer not to proceed with delivery, as was requested by an official of the Department of Environmental Affairs, working in the fleet administration unit. The very next day, another official working in the same division also requested the motor-vehicle company not to deliver. He indicated that he was not aware of the order, which he claimed had been processed by an unauthorized staff member. Had the delivery been made, the BMWs valued at close to R5 million, would have been dished out to unknown sources and the motor-vehicle dealer would most likely never have received payment. Molewa urgently needs to identify and act against the corrupt official or officials within her department, who so blatantly attempted to manipulate the procurement process. She also needs to establish on whose instruction they were acting, and for whom the BMWs were intended. It is unacceptable that private companies can be disadvantaged by the shortcomings in state department’s supply chain management processes. Should Molewa fail to respond to our request for an investigation, the DA will hand over all the evidence in our possession, including the government order, documents relating to the DEA’s acceptance of the tender, as well as delivery documents, to the Hawks. The DA does not tolerate corruption on any level. Officials who involve themselves in fraudulent activities must be removed from state departments and criminally investigated. Only change under a DA-led government will eradicate reckless financial mismanagement and fraud that cripples service delivery in state departments. Issued by Harold McGluwa, DA Northern Cape Provincial Chairperson & Chief Whip of the Provincial Caucus, 20 June 2018