Council dismisses section 56 manager for gross misconduct 22 June 2018 Today, Council has taken the decision to approve the dismissal of Mr Blake Mosely - Lefatola, the former Head of the City’s Group Strategy Policy Coordination and Relations, after a disciplinary process found him guilty of 12 disciplinary charges. Amongst other charges, Mosely - Lefatola, was found guilty of intentionally failing to execute the lawful policies of the Council, gross insubordination towards Council, the City Manager and myself, refusing to perform his functions in a good faith and contravening the Code of Conduct for municipal staff contained in schedule 2 of the Systems Act. The role of Head of GSPCR is a crucial function which assists the City in setting high level strategic plans which ought to ensure that the municipality fulfils its mandate and the needs of residents are met. During the last local government elections, our residents made it clear that they wanted change to come to Johannesburg. The wanted an end to corruption. They wanted quality service to be made available to their communities. They wanted clean and responsive governance. This is the mandate which Mr Mosely - Lefatola categorically chose to reject. During the disciplinary process, evidence was lead which incontrovertibly showed that in conducting himself, Mosely - Lefatola not only undermined the decisions of the City Council and Executive Mayor, but also undermined the authority of the City Manager to whom he at all material times reported to. In his ruling, the disciplinary hearing’s presiding officer found that: “The employer has discharged its onus to prove that the employee is guilty of the charges. The evidence is uncontested…” While I am sure that the ANC will attempt to label Mosely - Lefatola’s dismissal as ‘purging’ we remain clear that those who are found guilty of improper conduct have no place in this government – particularly where those concerned refuse to work towards serving the needs of residents. It must be noted that the ANC have opposed the multi-party government’s efforts, at every turn, in this process to ensure accountability. This just confirms how the ANC had sheltered the politically connected in the administration. The days when the ANC used to the City of Johannesburg as the vehicle for their cadre deployment are gone. This multi-party government expects that all public servants to carry out their duties not for the sake of any one particular party, but the benefit of all residents. It is high time that the ANC realises that during that last local government elections, the people of Johannesburg chose to purge them out of office in favour of a new administration which would put residents’ needs first. It is my belief that our residents deserve a City which serves them with the highest standards delivered by a civil service that is dedicated and proud. Over and above this, it is my belief that a professional public service is a precondition to being able to not only address the City’s challenges but also delivering quality services to residents. Mr Mosely - Lefatola has failed to meet this condition. This said, there many civil servants within the City who have dedicated themselves to serving our residents with pride. I would like to thank these employees for embracing this ethos and for their efforts in progressively helping to bring real change to the City of Johannesburg. Statement issued by Cllr Herman Mashaba, Executive Mayor, City of Johannesburg, 22 June 2018