KZN education department investigates allegations of sexual abuse at historic Adams College 14 June 2018 The KwaZulu-Natal department of education on Wednesday said that it had begun its investigation into allegations that male teachers at the historic Adams College, south of Durban, have sexual relationships with pupils. The allegations surfaced on social media on Monday when some of the victims posted on Twitter under the #AdamsCollege hashtag about their alleged ordeals while still at the school. Four former ANC presidents John Langalibalele Dube, JT Gumede, Pixley ka Isaka Seme and Chief Albert Luthuli were all pupils at the school. The first president of Botswana, Sir Seretse Khama, and local politicians Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and Mangosuthu Buthelezi also attended the school. Former president Jacob Zuma described the school as "an institution of presidents" during his visit there in September last year. Some of the school's alumni alleged that male teachers at the school sleep with pupils. One of the school's former pupils alleged that a teacher who had impregnated her, had forced her to abort her first child in 2014. Another pupil alleged that one night she had to fight off a teacher until the morning. According to her, most pupils regarded the man as a father figure. She said she had asked the teacher to tutor her and he invited her to his house. The teacher slept in the same bed with the pupil and tried to force himself on her, but she fought back, according to her. KwaZulu-Natal education department spokesperson Scelo Khuzwayo told News24 that they only became aware of the allegations on Monday. "A team was then put together, and it has already begun its investigation into the matter," he said. He said the department would only be in a position to take necessary steps once the team had concluded its investigation into the allegations. "So, we are awaiting investigations results after which we will then take necessary steps in line with the law," he said. The department advised pupils to report their grievances immediately rather than waiting to report them later when they had left school. "We've always said our doors are always open for pupils to report their grievances so that we deal with them immediately. If they feel there are important issues that the department should know about they must come forward so that the department would address them," he said. Khuzwayo reiterated that it was against the law for teachers to have intimate relationships with pupils. News24