ANC statement on the outcomes of the Special National Executive Committee 19 June 2018 The ANC National Executive Committee (NEC) met in a Special Session on the 18th of June 2018, as decided by its 3rd regular meeting held on the 26th to the 28th of May 2018 to consider reports on the E Cape, Free State and North West, and more generally preparations for Regional and Provincial conferences. The Special NEC dealt with these issues based on the report of the National Working Committee. ON REGIONAL AND PROVINCIAL CONFERENCES EASTERN CAPE The Special NEC noted the update on the audit and preparations for Regional conferences in the province and urged the National Officials to ensure an urgent political programme, working with the PEC and NEC Deployees, to facilitate a political solution that will ultimately aid unity and renewal given the organizational challenges, including ongoing litigation. LIMPOPO The Special NEC received and welcomed a report on the preparation towards the Limpopo Provincial Conference which is expected to take place from the 22nd of June 2018. The NEC will assist the province to ensure a successful conference. The Special NEC took note of the disbandment of the RECs in Waterberg and Peter Mokaba Regions as well as the subsequent appointment of Regional Task Teams(RTT’s) in both Regions. The Special NEC noted the work being done by the Provincial Dispute Resolution Committee and NEC Deployees to resolve complaints and disputes with affected structures and ANC members in Limpopo, and urge that these processes be concluded and decisions communicated to structures before the Provincial conference sits. FREE STATE The Special NEC noted the report of the NEC Deployees as requested by the last NEC on the Free State Conference and accordingly endorsed and accepted the outcomes of the Free State Provincial Conference. The Special NEC urged the newly elected PEC and NEC deployees to make use of available legitimate instruments to facilitate unity and renewal in the Province of the Free State. KWAZULU-NATAL The Special NEC noted that the challenges in the province can be resolved, in line with the mandate of the 54th National Conference. The Special NEC directed the National Dispute Resolution Committee (NDRC) to continue work with the PTT to address the issues raised by members who interdicted the Provincial Conference. In this regard, it would be possible to render the legal contestation redundant. The fundamental objective is to unite the organisation in pursuit of the core objective of the ANC which is to build a better life for all, especially the poor. The Special NEC agreed that the PTT, working with the National Officials and the NEC Deployees will ensure that the KZN Provincial Conference, when it sits before the end of July, focuses on substantive issues of social transformation, organizational renewal and a decisive victory in the elections. The Special NEC noted the good work done by the PTT, NEC and the NDRC and further encouraged all involved to continue on the path of unity and renewal. NORTHERN CAPE The Special NEC noted the report of the NEC Deployees on the processes around Namaqua, and the efforts to unify the Region and strengthen the movement. It endorsed the recommendation that the the Namaqua Regional conference be held immediately after the elections. NORTH WEST The Special NEC mandated the NWC to take a decision on the Premier Candidate by Thursday the 21st of June 2018. In this regard, a Special NWC will sit on Wednesday the 20th of June 2018 to conclude on the matter. GAUTENG The Special NEC noted and welcomed the report on preparations for the Provincial and Regional Conferences expected to all have convened on or before the end of July 2018. The Special NEC noted the work done by the Gauteng PEC working together with NEC Deployees in attending to disputes and complains and accordingly encourage all our structures to subject themselves to internal processes of the organization in seeking solutions to disputes. ON THE USE OF THE JUDICIARY TO FIGHT INTERNAL ANC PROCESSES The Special NEC affirmed its commitment to the measures for internal dispute resolution as set out in the ANC Constitution and Resolutions adopted by 54th National Conference at all levels. It implored responsible leadership structures and collectives at all levels to  abide by the letter and spirit of the ANC Constitution, in how they oversee and run organisational processes, and give ANC members the space to be heard and raise their grievances and complaints. It urges members to utilize internal processes. COUNCIL OF ELDERS The President will act on Conference resolution to convene a Council of Elders and report to the NWC and NEC. COUNT DOWN  TOWARDS SEAPARANKOE/ISITHWALANDWE TATA NELSON MANDELA CENTENARY The ANC launched the first of daily online citations of Tata Nelson Mandela’s speeches which form part of the countdown towards his centenary celebrations to pay tribute to this giant of the Congress Movement on Monday the 18th of June 2018. Born on the 18th of July 1918, Tata Mandela would have turned 100 years old on 18 July 2018. The count-down commenced exactly a month before we honor his centenary. The citations are posted daily across all our information dissemination and mass media platforms. Nelson Mandela 29 DAYS TO #Mandela100 “I pay tribute to the endless heroism of youth , you , the young lions. You the young lions, have energized the entire struggle” Issued by ANC Secretary General Cde Ace Magashule, 19 June 2018