Call to Reinstate Dr. Mpho Phalatse immediately! 12 June 2018 The South African Friends of Israel is appalled and devastated at the chain of events which has lead to the suspention of Dr. Mpho Phalatse (MMC – City of Johannesburg), who was a guest speaker at the SA Friends of Israel Conference, this last weekend. She has become the target of hysterical condemnation for having expressed support for Israel, when bringing greetings on behalf of the City of Johannesburg.  This is despite her subsequent clarification that she did so in her personal capacity. It is a sad day when elected officials are not free to attend events of their choosing, and express their personal religious or political views. This is indictive of the environment in which Israel is being demonised to a degree that bears no relationship to reality. Anti-Israel bigotry does not merely threaten the rights of the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of South Africans who are passionate supporters of Israel. It also poses a serious threat to democracy in our country. Dr Mpho Phalatse has become the latest target of this totalitarian strategy. This campaign is a clear attack on our Christian and Jewish community, as well as other minority religious communities, which remain committed to supporting Israel, in South Africa. This decision is simply pandering to the typical threats made by certain political parties, for their own political agendas. We call on all South Africans to condemn this decision, and appeal to the City of Johannesburg, to reinstate MMC, Dr. Mpho Phalatse, with immediate effect.  She is not deserving of this treatment, as she is huge asset to the governance of this city. South African Friends of Israel stands with Dr. Phalatse, and will continue to strengthen ties between the two democratic countries. “Those who bless Israel will be blessed. Those who curse Israel will be cursed”Gen: 12v3 Help us by sharing your voice on Social Media and signing the petition to maintain ties with Israel, click here Issued by Ben Swartz, Co-Chairman, South African Friends of Israel, 12 June 2018