Mashaba Reinstates MMC Phalatse with conditions 28 June 2018 The multi-party government has concluded its assessment and engagements surrounding the remarks made by MMC Mpho Phalatse on 10 June 2018. I suspended MMC Mpho Phalatse following a recording of her remarks made at an event in which she expressed her personal support, and that of the City of Johannesburg, for Israel. I addressed Council on 12 June 2018, confirming her rights to hold and express any personal belief she may hold and my commitment to defend this constitutional right. I equally expressed my disappointment that she spoke on behalf of the City of Johannesburg and in a manner which failed to grasp the sensitivity and complexity of the issue as it exists within our City and throughout the world. The investigation into the matter, came to the following conclusions: 1. The statement of MMC Mpho Phalatse did not contravene DA policy position of the Party on its commitment to a two-state solution in which a secure and prosperous Israel coexists peacefully alongside a secure and prosperous Palestine. 2. MMC Phalatse failed to ensure that sound judgement, to be expected of public representatives in the multi-party government, informed the manner in which she approached her official duties when she made the statement in question. 3. Arising from this, MMC Phalatse must be reprimanded for her remarks on behalf of the City of Johannesburg. Arising from the conclusion of this process, it is my decision that MMC Phalatse should be reinstated as a Member of the Mayoral Committee effective 28 June 2018 and that she should be publically reprimanded for her remarks in name of the City of Johannesburg. As the Executive Mayor for the City of Johannesburg, I have spoken to MMC Phalatse and I am appreciative that she is remorseful for the impact of her remarks. I have conveyed to her that her reinstatement must be conditional on two further actions which she has accepted: The first requirement of her is that she issue a public apology for her remarks on behalf of the City of Johannesburg. This was issued by MMC Phalatse of her own volition on 26 June 2018. The second requirement of MMC Phalatse, will be to attend a workshop, from an appropriate body, to better understand the complexity of issues in the Middle East. I would like to assure the residents of the City of Johannesburg, as well as members of the Jewish and Muslim communities in South Africa that we remain committed to the idea of a peaceful two-state solution in the Middle East. When I came into office my directive was to move away from the City’s excessive focus with International Relations and to rather focus on the many pressing service delivery backlogs that confront our residents on a daily basis. MMC Phalatse, a medical doctor by profession, has proven to be a high-performing Member of the Mayoral Committee. Her leadership of her Departments has been instrumental in the achievement of extended operating hours at City clinics and the rollout of our substance abuse facilities. The residents of the City of Johannesburg, especially those in need of primary health care and social services, would be best served by the return of MMC Phalatse and affording her the opportunity to contribute to a healthier and more socially cohesive City. This is our focus and, ultimately, the best way that we can serve the residents of our City. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 28 June 2018