Ogilvy announces new brand identity, structure by MarkLives. Ogilvy (now minus the Mather) sees a new logo and organisational design that transforms it from a "matrix-managed holding company of sub-brands" to "one brand represented by twelve crafts". #AgencyFocus: Riverbed ups creative game to bolster positioningby Carey Finn. Black-female-owned agency, Riverbed, is looking to cement its creativity — and position in the market — over the coming months. Brands must speak less more often — James Yeats Smith [interview]by Nils Adriaans. Following a recent move from Anomaly to international creative studio, Cloudfactory, in this interview SA export, James Yeats Smith, unpacks why the world needs more thinking brands. Fair Exchange: Partner-power for brand-growth expectationsby Erna George. There’s some concern around the table about how young and busy people are appreciating the client/agency partnership, with all the non-face-to-face channels that can get in the way. Masterclass Notes: 2018 AdForum Summit observations & trendsby Johanna McDowell. Here are 10 things that stood out at the recent AdForum Worldwide Summit in New York City, 23–27 April 2018.  Regular Reads: Cover Stories: Interview, Readymag Stories, The Lake, TIME & ZeitShelf Life: Purple Pongrácz • New Chappies facts • Seltzer EssenceSA TV Ratings: SA TV Ratings: SABC 2 — primetime top 20 for May, Apr 2018 On the Radar: - Weylandts appoints agency- #Campaigns: Sanlam's Born Today (filmed in a day)- #Campaigns: Addressing gender-based violence in Namibia- New agency targets travel, tourism niche- #Events: Shopper Disruptions SA Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.