Gauteng’s ANC-run Local Municipalities are bleeding 4 June 2018 The Auditor General (AG), Kimi Makwetu, in releasing the 2016/17 findings on the state of municipal finances revealed that local government has incurred irregular expenditure which increased upward by 75% to R28.4bn and fruitless and wasteful expenditure increased by 71% to R1.5bn. Recommendations by the AG are often ignored and those who misuse the people’s money are seldom brought to book. Despite the amendments to the Public Audit Act, which has empowered the AG to refer matters to the Hawks, SAPS, SIU or Public Protector, the onus is on provincial governments to implement measures to increase accountability in municipalities in their province. Gauteng’s ANC-run local municipalities are in a state of financial disrepair and urgently require intervention to ensure that residents do not bear the brunt of poor financial planning which has a negative impact on service delivery. Gauteng MEC for Finance, Barbara Creecy must capacitate her office with officials who have the necessary skill sets to make an impact on the decline in the well-being of these municipalities, many of which have officials who are running rogue. ANC-led Emfuleni has battled financial difficulties for many years, such as its inability to service its water and electricity debt. Residents often suffer from water-shedding or have the taps turned off indefinitely. The arrival of Jacob Khawe as Mayor has done little to arrest the poor state of affairs in the municipality. Lesedi Municipality is the centre of yet another ANC scandal where legislation and processes were flaunted to appoint a municipal manager who carries a cloud over his head for financial indiscretions during his time as Chief Financial Officer at the Thaba Chweu Local Municipality. Merafong, Mogale City and the West Rand District Municipality are also under financial strain and have presented unfunded mandates for the coming financial year. Despite new legislation being rolled out, unskilled departmental officials do not have the appetite or competency to arrest these problems timeously. Local municipalities in the province must be assisted sooner rather than later because there is a rapid decline in the quality of life for residents, service delivery and sound financial planning. The DA will push MEC Creecy to take a sterner approach with wayward municipalities and fill funded vacancies in her office with staff that can meet the demand for urgent intervention. Issued by Adriana Randall, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Finance, 4 June 2018