Zille's tweet on colonialism violates Constitution - Public Protector The Public Protector has found that a tweet about colonialism by Western Cape Premier Helen Zille is in violation of the Constitution. In a report released on Monday, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane said that Zille's conduct was tantamount to improper conduct in terms of the Constitution, as well as violating the Executive Ethics Code. In 2017, Zille tweeted: "For those claiming legacy of colonialism was ONLY negative, think of our independent judiciary, transport infrastructure etc." "It cannot be said that the Premier's tweet sought to show concern and respect for those who were victims of apartheid and colonialism," said Mkhwebane in an executive summary. She added that, although Zille had apologised, the apology could be interpreted as a recognition of the negative impact the tweet had on the dignity of a section of the South African population. The Public Protector said, while the tweet could have been made in the context of Zille's right of freedom to expression, it was still offensive and insensitive to a section of the South African population which regarded it as reopening a lot of pain and suffering to the victims of apartheid and colonialism. "Section 16 of the Constitution was, therefore, not created to allow anyone, particularly those in positions of influence, to make such statements," said Mkhwebane. As part of her recommendation on remedial action, Mkhwebane has instructed the speaker of the Western Cape legislature to take appropriate action and hold Zille accountable for her conduct. Zille's office has issued a statement, in response to Mkhwebane's findings, saying that the premier is likely to take the report on judicial review. "The premier has already advised the Public Protector that, in her view, such a finding would be unlawful and irrational." Mkhwebane told reporters that Zille had written to her, saying she had done nothing wrong and was within her rights in terms of freedom of speech when she made the tweet. News24 *** R100k alleged porn bill: Top Limpopo govt official must pay back the money - PP The Public Protector found deputy speaker in the Limpopo legislature Lehlogonolo Masoga guilty of improper conduct and maladministration after running up a bill of over R100 000 on a work cellphone while on a US trip. In a report released on Monday, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane recommended that Masoga pay back part of the R125 000 bill that he racked up while on an official work trip to the US in 2014. News24 sister publication City Press previously reported that the deputy speaker had run up the bill by allegedly watching porn while on the overseas trip. The legislature then settled the huge bill. At the time in a joint statement with the legislature, Masoga said the claims were a "smear campaign anchored on a cheap, beer-talk conspiracy to rubbish Masoga's name" on a "baseless" matter "not supported by facts". "I reject with contempt the malicious, libellous and defamatory allegations levelled against me by some not-so-faceless conspirators to injure my integrity for cheap political motives," he said in the statement. Mkhwebane found it was substantiated that Masoga had incurred an "exorbitant or unreasonable" mobile telephone bill while on the US trip. She further found that the deputy speaker violated the Constitution and that his conduct was improper as envisaged in the Public Protector's Act related to maladministration. "The amount spent by the deputy speaker was unreasonably high compared to other members of the legislature who travelled with him during the same trip to the USA," said Mkhwebane in an executive summary of the report. The allegation that an employee of the legislature was suspended after querying the telephone bill was not substantiated, Mkhwebane said. It was found that the employee was suspended for misconduct because she had violated the supply chain and treasury regulations which resulted in the legislature incurring irregular expenditure. In her recommendations, Mkhwebane said the speaker of the legislature must review sections of policy that provide for the total allowance of combined telephone, mobile table and laptop data for members of the legislature on official trips. She added that the legislature must take appropriate action and recover a reasonable portion of the amount spent from Masoga. Mkhwebane said this should be done within 60 days of the report being released. News24