EFF STATEMENT ON CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT TO ALLOW LAND EXPROPRIATION WITHOUT COMPENSATION Wednesday, I August, 2018 The Economic Freedom Fighters notes that the ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa has finally capitulated and submitted to the basic logic of amending section 25 of South Africa's Constitution to allow for expropriation of Land without Compensation. This was after months of the ANC's confusing and contradictory statements and assurances to white minority owners and controllers of South Africa's land and economy that no Constitutional Amendment will be made. After its land Summit, the ANC had produced an ideologically and politically confused resolution that expropriation of Land without compensation can and should happen within the current Constitutional framework. The resolute submissions of the people on the ground and in all the public hearings exposed the ANC to the fact that an absolute majority of black people agree with the EFF's steadfast and consistent position that the Constitution should be amended to allow for expropriation of Land without compensation. This illustrates that when given an opportunity, the people of South Africa are always ready to provide resolute guidance on key economic and redress Questions. Were it not for the EFF's motion that the Constitutional Review Committee should conduct public hearings, the ANC elite, like they did in the land summit, would still be swimming in the confusion that expropriation without compensation can happen without changing the constitution. The EFF has provided a platform for the people of South Africa to govern. The EFF also notes that the ANC is still swimming in confusion on the question of State Custodianship of all South Africa's land. We however believe that like they did with the amendment of the constitution to allow for expropriation of Land without compensation, the ANC will subsequently appreciate the value and unavoidable necessity of having the state as custodian of all South Africa's land. The EFF is unashamed to be at the forefront of the struggles of land expropriation without compensation and will consistently and with patience continue to provide lucid ideological and political guidance. The people of South Africa should be rest assured that with the EFF at the forefront, all South Africa's land with be returned to its rightful owners, and the Settlers and their descendants will be allocated proportional to population size in South Africa. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 1 August 2018