MKMVA condemns the colonial arrogance of Donald Trump and the fake reactionary propaganda of AfriForum 23 August 2018 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) is appalled by the astounding arrogance of the President of the United States of America (USA), Mr. Donald Trump, who wants to instruct us, as South Africans, about how to deal with our own domestic affairs. Apparently Mr. Trump wants to advise us about property rights and #LandRestitution without compensation, as if we are a colony, or the 51st States of the USA. Mr. Trump will be well advised to mind his own business, and to rather address the history of full scale theft of the land of the indigenous people of the USA, and the brutal killing of most of them by his white colonial ancestors. Evidently Mr. Trump is part of the same WhatsApp Group with AfrForum and lends his ears to the lies that AfriForum peddles. This is part of AfriForum's treacherous destabilization campaign, in order to resist the expropriation of the land that their forefathers stole from the indigenous African inhabitants of South Africa. MKMVA issues a stern warning to AfriForum to stop their nonsense and their peddling of lies forthwith, or they will face the consequences. It is a blatant lie that the South African government, and with specific reference to the South African Police Service (SAPS), do not do everything within their means to protect all South African citizens, including white farmers. The stories about so-called "large scale killing of (white) farmers", and "farm seizures" are propagandistic misinformation, deliberately distributed in order to stoke on racial tension and instability. The South African government is not involved in any "land/ farm seizures". Instead, following the Resolution in favour #LandExpropriation without Compensation of the 54th National Conference of the ANC, the South African Parliament embarked on a broad public engagement programme providing every South African who wished to speak up and register their views about #LandReform in an orderly democratic process. Like many other organisations, and individuals of various persuasions, AfriForum was able to participate in this process without any hindrance. The African National Congress as the majority party, and leader of South African society, was formed in 1912 with it's main mandate to address the land issue, and to ensure that the gross historical injustice when the land was literally stolen at gun-point from the African people by white colonialism, must be redressed. At its 54th National Conference the ANC finally grasped that nettle with the Resolution On Land Redistribution, and resolved: - We must pursue with greater determination the programme of land reform and rural development as part of the programme of radical socio-economic transformation. - Expropriation of land without compensation should be among the key mechanisms available to government to give effect to land reform and redistribution." The ANC as the majority political party, and pre-eminent liberation Movement in South Africa, has a historical and clear majority democratic mandate to pursue and implement this critical policy resolution. This was confirmed again yesterday by President Cyril Ramaphosa, during Presidential Question Time in The National Assembly, when he stated that the ANC government is determined to redress the gross historical injustice of the land having been stolen from the African people by white colonialists, and that it intends to amend Section 25 of the Constitution in order to ensure that the, "Expropriation of land without compensation should be among the key mechanisms available to government", without any hindrance or impediment. President Ramaphosa also emphasized that this will be done legally, and in an orderly manner. So irresponsible allegations of so-called "land grabs" and " land seizures", are deliberately alarmist lies. AfriForum must understand that it is the ANC's democratic, and Constitutionally enshrined right to pursue our policies. It is on the basis of those policies that we have a democratic mandate from the majority of South Africans. Any attempt to subvert our right to do so, either by stoking on domestic instability or soliciting foreign intervention from the likes of Donald Trump, or any other foreign power, is nothing short of criminal and Treason. The liberation fighters of Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), who are the members of MKMVA, have dedicated our lives to the struggle for the full liberation of our people, which MUST include the return of our land to the African people as the rightful owners. We will resist with all the legal means at our disposal any attempt by any-one, whether inside or outside South Africa, to deny us our rightful economic empowerment and full liberation. Aluta Continua! Issued by Carl Niehaus, MKMVA NEC Member and National Spokesperson, 23 August 2018