SA needs more black farmers – expropriation won’t achieve that 1 August 2018 Agri SA notes the ANC President’s most recent announcement that the ANC intends to amend the constitution as it relates to agriculture land.    “We are currently in a consultation process where South Africans are participating in a process of review – we have actually taken the time to participate in this process – and this announcement, by the governing party, serves only to undermine the process underway” Dan Kriek, President of Agri SA remarked. “SA needs more black farmers and black farms. Constitutional amendments - and even worst-case expropriation without compensation - may make for good electioneering but it doesn’t make more black farmers” Kriek articulated. EWC and economic growth are diametrically contrasted – and nowhere in the world has this worked in any shape or form.  “Agrarian reform can only happen successfully working hand in hand, in partnership, with the private sector” Omri van Zyl, Executive Director of Agri SA remarked. “We have seen this movie play out all over world – Venezuela, Russia – the promise for emerging farmers of tools, fertilizer, seeds and extension services are superficial – many have promised this as election ploys– and yet the outcome is always catastrophic for agriculture and food security” van Zyl remarked. Kriek mentioned this this was irresponsible electioneering and that the leaders of our country should be more vigilant and responsible when it comes to the future of the economy and job creation for all South Africans.  “We are a full and active participant in the upcoming ANC jobs summit – this position will not encourage us to invest in the sector to create more jobs.” “This is a populist move from the ANC that will lead to an economic downgrade – massive capital exodus and a contagion effect of all property and intellectual property classes” van Zyl remarked.  There will be a dramatic effect on the commercial, residential and property investment space van Zyl indicated. Kriek clearly articulated that this is an irresponsible move by the ANC and that should the party really want to address job creation and poverty alleviation – Agri SA is willing to talk. Issued by Thea Liebenberg, Media Liasion Officer, Agri SA, 1 August 2018