Lamola slams EFF on 'wild' state capture claims against Motsepe 2 July 2018 ANC national working committee (NWC) member Ronald Lamola slammed EFF leader Julius Malema and accused him of making "wild and unsubstantiated" allegations against businessman Patrice Motsepe. During his speech at the celebration of the EFF's 5th anniversary in Mdantsane in the Eastern Cape over the weekend, Malema accused Motsepe of being a "state capture threat". "It's just a public statement aimed at ridiculing black excellence and to ridicule all processes the government is [using to try] to empower black people," Lamola said during a press conference after the ANC held its two-day national executive committee (NEC) lekgotla. Malema had said, while they liked Motsepe, "greed" was going to make them fight him very hard and he threatened to reclaim his mines. "We want to warn Patrice Motsepe – we are watching you, the same way we watched the Guptas: Stop doing what you are doing.  It is unacceptable," said the EFF leader. In particular, he warned that Motsepe's ties to President Cyril Ramphosa and Energy Minister Jeff Radebe – who are married to Motsepe sisters - were dangerous. But Lamola hit back at Malema, saying "they thrive on wild and unsubstantiated allegations". He said, if Malema had evidence, he must lodge a complaint with the Public Protector like the DA did about the controversial Gupta family. "If they have this thing (evidence), the Public Protector is there, and they can even go to court to request an expansion of the Zondo [Commission of] Inquiry [ into state capture]," Lamola said. He said if state capture amounted to being associated with a person, then Malema and his party were also captured by Motsepe as they attended the Barcelona vs Sundowns game in May. "They went in with Patrice at the Barcelona game and they met with (Lionel) Messi. They were taking pictures and selfies with all the Barcelona players, so it means the EFF is captured by Motsepe," Lamola said. The ANC has rarely responded to EFF allegations against it. News24