Agri SA discuss EWC and agrarian reform with major trading partners 30 August 2018 Agri SA has shared its view and concerns over the motion for expropriation without compensation (EWC) of property with South Africa’s most important trade and investment partners. Agri SA met with several ambassadors and diplomatic staff from 13 countries over the course of two days to discuss EWC and to highlight its views on an expedited agrarian reform plan. The engagement forms part of a broader consultation process with key stakeholders. Agri SA was accompanied by Free State Agriculture, Agri Gauteng and Agri North West, Agbiz, Grain SA and farmers. “These discussions not only serve as an important avenue to air Agri SA’s views to the world, but also a way to gather important insights,” said Omri van Zyl, Agri SA Executive Director. “It is important to firstly understand how foreign jurisdictions view the EWC debate. Furthermore, we discussed trade barriers and risks, to ensure continued collaboration with our international trade partners.” Some of the salient points that emerged in the discussion is that South Africa’s economic partners are concerned over EWC. There is also an overwhelming appetite for agrarian reform and a willingness to get involved through funding. Finally, South Africa’s deficient trade administration has been singled out as requiring immediate attention to ensure improved export opportunities for South African producers. “Many see South Africa as the food basket of Southern Africa and a massively important player in the African economy,” said Van Zyl. “One ambassador said it clearly that no-one wants to see South Africa fail.” Agri SA has already discussed its views consistently with President Cyril Ramaphosa and Deputy President David Mabuza, amongst others. Simultaneously, Agri SA remains opposed to EWC and has plans in hand to ensure rapid and sustainable agrarian reform. Agri SA will continue to proclaim its position against EWC. Issued by Thea Liebenberg, Media Liaison Officer, Agri SA, 30 August 2018