Don Mattera: No one knows how many children are at the home 22 August 2018 Following a slew of allegations, some of which include sex abuse, the DA requested that the Don Mattera children’s home be investigated. Last year, reports surfaced of incidents of sodomy, sexual intercourse among children at the home as well as eight children having gone missing. One of the missing children was later found prostituting near the Joburg CBD. We have now learnt that following these investigations, no one knows exactly how many children live at the home. The reports done by the Gauteng Provincial Department of Social Services (DSD) and the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) contradict the Minister of Social Development. In a Parliamentary reply, the Minister stated that in August 2017 there were 75 children at the centre while the SAHRC stated there were 61 children. This is a difference of 14 children. Likewise, the Provincial DSD report states that in November 2017 there were 40 children at the centre, while the Minister’s Parliamentary reply states 61 children. This is a difference of 21 children. These contradictions are a high-level indication that the credibility of the findings is questionable to say the least. The departmental report on the nutritional issues was of great concern in terms of quality, quantity and procurement practices. This was manifested in the food riot that happened at the facility on the 20th July 2018. The Edenvale CPF, SAPS and Cllr Rundle attended to the scene after it was reported to the Councillor that there was a disturbance at the home. Information on hand following the incident indicates that most of the boys have been moved out and there should be 40 girls there. The empty fridges and the facility manager and supervisor fleeing when the disturbance started is in stark contrast to the statement by the HSRC that the facility is suitable for the purpose required and does not pose a risk to their safety. It is questionable whether anyone at these institutions actually met the children or even set foot on the premises. The DA will do all that we can to see that the safety of these children is ensured. Issued by Mike Waters, DA Deputy Chief Whip in National Assembly and Lethabong Constituency Head, 22 August 2018