FF Plus’s international plan of action against expropriation without compensation and SMS helpline for persons whose land is illegally occupied 27 August 2018 Expropriation without compensation and land grabs have become a reality in South Africa and all South African communities, in particular the agricultural community, are experiencing great uncertainty regarding how the process will play out and how it will affect everyone in the country. In light of this, the FF Plus is introducing further action steps to oppose the process of expropriation without compensation and to take action, on international level, against the ANC government as well as to offer support to persons whose property is at risk by means of a dedicated SMS helpline where they can get help and advice. The SMS number is 43366. The FF Plus has already lodged an official complaint with the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations (UN) regarding the ANC government's violation of Article 17 of the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which protects private ownership of property and prohibits expropriation without compensation. On request of the American Embassy in South Africa, the party will also submit a presentation to the American representative, which will explicate the land issue as well as farm attacks and murders. This forms part of the FF Plus's ongoing “Fight Back SA” campaign that is aimed at bringing the matter under the attention of the international community and actively opposing the ANC government in this regard. Despite the vague undertakings made by President Cyril Ramaphosa about how the process will take place, lasting and unrealistic expectations have already been created among the masses and the effect of this can be seen in the illegal land occupations that have already occurred across the country in places like Stellenbosch, Virginia, Harrismith and Wesselsbron. In Parys, municipal land was also occupied at the weekend. It is clear that the people at ground level have absolutely no regard for the President's undertakings. It also raises the question of whether the police really do have the political will and capability to take decisive action if mass land occupations take place countrywide. The FF Plus wants to make it very clear that the party is not opposed to land reform and that Section 25 of the Constitution, as is, already makes provision for land reform to take place in an ordered and responsible manner by offering landowners compensation. The process only failed due to the corruption, mismanagement and incompetence of the ANC government and its institutions. Two further misconceptions that the government and the EFF are using as narrative to support the proposed process of expropriation without compensation is that white people have stolen the land in their possession and that merely owning land results in prosperity. It is devoid of all truth. The FF Plus insists that the existing, legal mechanisms must be used to let land reform take place in an ordered manner. The party will oppose all unfair attempts at land reform in all possible ways. Statement issued by Dr. Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 27 August 2018