Tshwane Mayor Msimanga committed to squeezing out corruption 23 August 2018 Today the Executive Mayor of Tshwane, Solly Msimanga, requested Council to issue the City Manager with a notice of intention to suspend pending the outcome of an independent investigation into alleged misconduct on his part. This recommendation was carried by the Council despite the EFF walking out of the chambers. This special council meeting was called in light of very serious allegations of irregularities levelled against the City Manager in terms of improperly awarding a tender for the project management unit in the City, which could expose the City to severe financial risk worth hundreds of millions or more. The Democratic Alliance (DA) takes all allegations of impropriety very seriously but also recognizes the responsibility to ensure that the City Manager given a right of reply in line with natural justice and municipal regulations - which is why the report which served before council recommended we follow due process. The EFF walked out after asserting that the report and recommendations were driven by race-based motivations. It is patently disingenuous of the EFF to try and justify their decision to walk out by accusing the Mayor of having some form of racial motivation. This is nothing more than a weak attempt to explain away actions which fail the residents of the City and which are clearly taken for personal and political interests. Furthermore, it shows that the party has no commitment to tackling corruption and has also failed in their duty as councillors to hold the city’s officials accountable for their actions, as is a core responsibility of all municipal councils, and must explain to the public why they have done so. In light of the prima facie evidence available, it is vital that an independent investigation begins without any delay given the serious nature of these allegations and the possibility that they will impact governance in the City. This DA-led coalition government has managed to bring significant positive change to Tshwane. We must continue to be able to bring better services to our residents and this can only occur in an environment of transparency and accountability. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA National Spokesperson, 23 August 2018