NW Premier and failed ANC have collapsed service delivery in faction-ridden Ramotshere 22 August 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West will write to Premier Job Mokgoro calling him to do his job and urgently intervene in the collapsing Ramotshere Moiloa Local Municipality in Zeerust. The DA has in the past made several attempts to get a reaction from the MEC for Local Government and Human Settlements, Fenny Gaolaolwe over service delivery issues in municipalities across the province, but to date, she has failed to address this. The faction-ridden municipality’s poor performance came under the spotlight during the Portfolio Committee meeting on Local Government last week, revealing a R300 million loss in expenditure that is unaccounted for. This blatant mismanagement of funds has a devastating effect on service delivery and infrastructure development. Our people are left high and dry due to a water and sanitation project that remains incomplete. A further mysterious disappearance of R90 million was left unaccounted for and we believe that proper investigation should be conducted so that those who are responsible can be criminally charged. Adding to the collapse of service delivery is the vacant positions of key personnel such as a technician to attend to the desperate sewage dilemma in the Zeerust area. It is shameful that money that could have been used to increase water output in the Zeerust area has been abused by corrupt council officials, and in the face of palpable factionalism, the rampant corruption and financial difficulties are nearly impossible to solve. The unlawful removal of the Council Speaker after requesting an independent investigation on alleged corruption by councillors and the unlawful appointment of the municipal manager has contributed to the division. The DA will request Premier Mokgoro to urgently address the factionalism in this municipality, as this is the main reason for the total collapse of service delivery. A DA-led government will take the people of North West's plight for proper service delivery seriously. Only the DA can turn around collapsed municipalities. Issued by Jacqueline Theologo, DA North West Spokesperson on Local Government and Human Settlements, 22 August 2018