City condemns violent protests in Soweto 29 August 2018 This afternoon, I was notified of violent community unrest taking place in White City, Soweto. It is believed that the cause of the violence was sparked by accusations that shop owners within the community had allegedly been selling counterfeit and expired goods to members of the community. This comes just a day after JMPD was conducting its Operation Buya Mthetho in the Maraisburg area to deal with shop owners selling expired foodstuff to the public. Upon receiving reports of attacks and looting of shops owned by foreign nationals in the area, the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (JMPD) rushed to the scene. Upon arrival, it was discovered that the situation was extremely volatile with reports that two persons having been killed during the course of the violence. So far, it is reported that 3 suspects have been arrested for murder and the possession of illegal firearm while 12 others have been arrested for public violence. Reports of attacks on shops owned by foreign nationals are said to be spreading across the area. JMPD and South African Police Services (SAPS) have been deployed to the community in a bid to contain the situation and prevent criminal activity. We condemn the acts of violence in the strongest terms. We are deeply concerned to see levels of violence which have resulted in the loss of two young lives. There can be no room for lawless within our society. I will be visiting the area this evening in order to assess the situation and implement any appropriate action on behalf of the City. I urge all residents to not to take the law into their own hands or resort to acts of violence and looting. I also urge all shop owners and retailers to immediately remove from their shelves any counterfeit and expired foodstuff or goods. JMPD will continue conducting an operation to rid our community of such ill business practices. The City wishes to express its deepest condolences to the families of the and will offer the necessary assistance to them. Issued by Luyanda Longwe, Stakeholder Manager, Office of the MMC for Public Safety, City of Johannesburg, 29 August 2018