Supra continues to use state vehicles and security 2 August 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West has written to the Office of the Public Protector to investigate allegations that ousted Premier, Supra Mahumapelo, is still enjoying government benefits reserved for a Premier. Further to this, we will be writing to the Speaker of the North West Provincial Legislature, Sussana Dantjie, to immediately probe why the privileges reserved for a sitting Premier are still being afforded to Mahumaphelo. The outcomes of the Speaker’s investigation must be tabled before the Legislature. Mahumapelo is no longer entitled to the use of official vehicles or VIP protection. Those benefits should have been withdrawn the day he tendered his resignation. The ANC believe that the State is the ANC and that the ANC is the State. The evidenced by the fact that Mahumaphelo, who no longer holds an executive position in the North West Province. Another abuse of the people’s resources was put on display when the ANC President, Cyril Ramaphosa, used the public broadcaster to convey a party message. It is in the DNA of the ANC to put the party above the people, the Constitution and ethical leadership. Mahumaphleo is the Chairperson of the ANC in North West and is not in service of the people. The people’s money should not be used to chauffeur and protect a man who actively collapsed the Province, and used the people’s money to maintain a corrupt patronage network. The ANC is allowing him to enjoy benefits that he has no right to. Muhamaphelo, while no longer officially leading the North West, continues to undermine the people of the Province who suffer due to unemployment, experiences of no service delivery and feel the pinch of corruption and poor governance. Real change is needed in 2019. The people of the North West have an opportunity to usher in change that puts the people first and rejects corruption and self-interest. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader, 2 August 2018