Shaun Abrahams on his post-NPA plans: 'I will not be lost to the legal fraternity' 15 August 2018 Former National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head Shaun Abrahams appears to be taking a breather after a court order kicked out of his position. The controversial NPA figure penned a response on Wednesday afternoon, thanking those closest to him for the opportunity to head South Africa's prosecuting body. Abrahams said he has officially been unemployed since Monday. "I will take some time out to spend with my family who has seen very little of me since taking up the position of National Director for Public Prosecutions (NDPP). I will always be a prosecutor at heart and will certainly miss being a prosecutor." He said he would also miss "those very committed members of the NPA who significantly contributed to the successes of the organisation during my time at the helm". "I know it could not have been easy." He said he was happy to have served the NPA despite the tumultuous time in which he took over. "It was a tremendous honour and privilege for me to serve in the NPA in excess of 23 years, especially as the head of this all-important institution over the last three years and seven weeks, albeit during the most volatile political period since the dawn of our young democracy." Abrahams added: "I wish the acting NDPP and the future NDPP along with the leadership of the NPA all the very best for the future." Abrahams thanked employees at the NPA who supported him "during an extremely difficult financial and political period". "As a career prosecutor, I, more than anyone, understood their challenges." He said that while he was unsure of his future, he "will not be lost to the legal fraternity". "I look forward to serving society and the country going forward in a capacity in which I could meaningfully and impactfully contribute." NPA spokesperson Luvuyo Mfaku said Abrahams would conduct a handover to newly-appointed acting prosecutions boss Silas Ramaite. "[Abrahams] is also engaging with Dr Ramaite on matters where he has historical knowledge," Mfaku said. President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed Ramaite on Tuesday after Abrahams was forced to vacate his office following the Constitutional Court ruling on Monday. The court found that Abrahams' appointment was invalid because his predecessor, Mxolisi Nxasana, was wrongfully removed by then-president Jacob Zuma. The court ruled that Nxasana must pay back the R17m, which after tax came to R10m, that Zuma paid him to leave the post. Ramaphosa now has three months to choose a new NPA head. News24