Unions signed a three-year wage agreement with Eskom 30 August 2018 The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) has signed a three-year wage agreement with Eskom in the early hours of this morning. The agreement shall apply from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2021 to all permanent employees employed in the Bargaining Unit at Eskom The provisions of the wage agreement also include, among others, the following adjustments: 1. Wage increase - Year one  7,5% - Year two 7% - Year three 7% 2. Housing Allowance Housing allowance will be increased by CPI for each year of the wage agreement A once-off cash payment of R10 000 after tax for all employees in the Bargaining Forum at Eskom to be made within 48 hours of the signing. The unions and Eskom agreed that the review of the current Short-Term Incentive Scheme will be referred for further engagement at the Central Consultative Forum (CCF). The conditions of service will remain unchanged for the period 1 July 2018  to 30 June 2021. The 2018 Eskom wage negotiations has been the most difficult ever in the history of the NUM. This was caused by the Eskom approach to the wage negotiations when they tabled a 0% wage offer in the beginning of this wage negotiations. That was a clear provocation to our members. Eskom Board Chairperson Jabu Mabuza even admitted that the 0% wage offer was a tactical error. The NUM is also worried that the industrial relations between Eskom and  the trade unions is not good under the current Eskom leadership. We hope that the industrial relations between the parties will improve and bring stability that is necessary at the power utility. We truly thank our disciplined members who are the owners of this revolutionary giant union for giving us a mandate to sign this wage agreement today. Issued by Livhuwani Mammburu, NUM National Spokesperson NUMSA signs collective wage agreement with Eskom The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) has signed the collective agreement with the Eskom Central Bargaining Forum. The wage offer is broken down as follows: - The agreement is a three-year agreement and will apply from 1 July 2018 – 30 June 2021 and is applicable to all permanent workers at Eskom -  Year one 7.5% increase - Year two 7% increase - Year three 7% increase - A once off cash payment of R10 000 after tax for all employees in the Bargaining Forum to be made within 48 hours of signing. - Housing allowance will be increased by CPI for each year of the wage agreement - The conditions of service will remain unchanged for the period 1 July 2018 – 30 June 2021 - Parties agree that the review of the current Short Term Incentive Scheme will be referred for further engagement at the Central Consultative Forum (CCF) negotiations. We thank our members for demonstrating militant discipline in the face of extreme provocation by the employer. We started at 0% and thanks to your efforts, we have secured an increase. We are also grateful to members of the negotiating team who worked tirelessly to resolve the impasse. Aluta continua! The struggle continues! Issued by Irvin Jim, NUMSA General Secretary Solidarity signs Eskom's wage offer Trade union Solidarity announced today that it had accepted Eskom’s offer of a wage increase of 7,5% for this year, a 7% increase for years two and three with a guaranteed increase equal to the CPI on housing, as well as a once-off cash payment of R10 000 after taxes. According to Deon Reyneke, Deputy General Secretary at Solidarity, the trade union also confirmed that Eskom will act decisively against all those who, during the negotiations, have made themselves guilty of unlawful behaviour that falls outside of Eskom's code of conduct. Issued by Deon Reyneke, Deputy General Secretary, Solidarity Eskom and trade unions sign wage agreement Eskom is pleased to announce that it has reached a three-year wage agreement with its recognised trade unions, ending the impasse. Eskom and trade unions National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) and Solidarity signed the wage agreement in the early hours of this morning following talks. In terms of the three-year agreement on wages and conditions of employment, Eskom’s bargaining unit employees will see a salary adjustments of 7.5% in 2018/19 (effective as of July 2018), 7% in 2019/20 and 7% in 2020/21, an annual cost of living (CPI) adjustment to their housing allowance as well as a once-off cash payment of R10,000 after tax to be paid within 48 hours of the agreement being signed. “Eskom wishes to thank all the parties involved in the negotiation process for their endeavor to find an amicable solution. The conclusion of these negotiations enables us to firmly focus on the Eskom of the future and building a sustainable business to power the nation and grow the economy,” Eskom Group Executive for Human Resources Elsie Pule said. Issued by Eskom Media Desk, 30 August 2018