Land Reform: Speaker must urgently convene Parliament to deliberate ANC’s undermining of the economy 1 August 2018 Last night’s announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa, indicating that the ANC will move forward to expropriate land without compensation and amend the Constitution to give effect to such, is a direct attempt to undermine Parliament and is contributing to no confidence in the economy. This is yet another blow to the almost 10 million unemployed South Africans. I have therefore written to the Speaker of the National Assembly, Baleka Mbete, requesting the immediate reconvening of Parliament for an urgent sitting to deliberate on this matter. Parliament’s Constitutional Review Committee was established to ensure the voice of the people is heard as to whether section 25 of the Constitution ought to be amended. We need to established where this process has been properly followed. It beggar’s belief that while there are still half a million submissions to be processed by the Constitutional Review Committee, and no less than five public hearings still to be conducted in the Western Cape, the ANC has decided to jump the gun, undermine this public consultation procedure, and render the entire process moot. It is incumbent on the Speaker of Parliament, as the guardian of this Constitutional body, to protect it from being undermined by political machinations and brinkmanship. I implore her to act in the best interests of the country, not the ANC. The DA will never, under any circumstances, support a reckless policy that removes economic power from individuals and hands it to a corrupt government. Land reform is a justice issue, and we advocate for land reform that champions private property rights and empowers individuals – as evidenced in DA-led governments across the country. We don’t need a new Constitution clause to accelerate land reform, we need a new government. The ANC cannot on its own amend the Constitution as it requires a two thirds majority vote in Parliament. It appears the ANC is being led by other populist parties who only want to sow division, eradicate properly rights, and see our economy implode. We call on all South Africans to reject populism and stand up for constitutionalism in building One South Africa For All. South Africa is currently facing an ANC-created economic and unemployment crisis. With almost 10 million jobless South Africans, every decision ought to be measured on the impact it has on the economy and job creation. Expropriating land without compensation will damage the economy and will lead to many more joining the ranks of the unemployed. Therefore, the DA can never support such a policy. Issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 1 August 2018