COSATU statement on the job losses at Afro Worldview TV 22 August 2018 The Congress of South African Trade Unions demands an assurance from Multichoice that all workers that are in the employ of Afro Worldview TV will not lose their jobs after the new channel has been announced. There are about 350 jobs that are at stake since Multichoice announced that they were not going to renew their contract with the then ANN7 News Channel in their broadcasting podium. It is totally unacceptable that these workers are subjected to this inconvenience and traumatic situation when they did not have a dog in the hunt that led to the falling out of the former partners. Workers are just caught in the crossfire and this is unacceptable in a country with such a high rate of unemployment. COSATU wants to see all the 350 workers retained and not “considered” by whoever will be awarded the new contract. If Multichoice cannot guarantee that these workers , then they need to sort out whatever differences they have with Afro world View and save the jobs of these workers. Workers cannot be treated like glorifies slaves and have their livelihoods taken away by those who enjoy monopoly and inherited power. This situation is a reminder of how toxic the monopoly by Multichoice is because it does not only muddy the media landscape but also it also compromises the livelihoods of entire families. The time has come for the state to be more hands-on in not just creating jobs but in transforming the economy. South African monopolies cannot continue to be allowed to act in a way that is only motivated by the short-term view of profitability without the long-term perspective of development. If companies do not review their positions on job cuts; then government needs to intervene decisively because the current rate of unemployment in this country is socially and politically unsustainable. The country needs to move to an entirely new economic development framework that is about meeting the needs of the people. The economic forces of this crisis and stagnation are deep-rooted and only profound economic restructuring and the forging of new strategies for growth and development will bring about a solution to the problems posed by monopolies like Multichoice. Issued by Sizwe Pamla, National Spokesperson, COSATU, 22 August 2018