FF Plus will talk to American representative in South Africa regarding matters touched on by President Trump 23 August 2018 The FF Plus and other role players’ continuous efforts to inform the world of the injustices in South Africa are starting to pay off. The FF Plus has already asked the American Embassy in Pretoria for a chance to discuss the situation in South Africa, in particular the matters that the American President, Donald Trump, touched on, namely farm murders and expropriation without compensation. This is related to the FF Plus’s continuous awareness campaign to inform the international community of how minorities’ rights are trampled in South Africa as well as the high incidence of brutality and farm attacks and murders. In addition to the FF Plus’s Fight Back SA campaign that was launched on the 5th of March with the specific aim of raising international awareness, the party’s leadership also travelled abroad year after year to carry out the message. Dr Pieter Groenewald, leader of the FF Plus, visited Belgium, among other places, earlier this year, he also met with European members of parliament and addressed the presidency of UNPO (Unrepresented Nations & Peoples Organization). A delegation of the German party AfD (Alternative for Germany) visited the FF Plus’s Parliamentary caucus earlier this year to gather more information on various issues like expropriation without compensation and farm murders. The FF Plus is already in the process of lodging an official complaint with the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations (UN) regarding the ANC government’s violation of Article 17 of the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which protects private ownership of property and prohibits expropriation without compensation. Dr Groenewald says that the FF Plus will continue to ensure that there is international pressure on the ANC. He adds that it is insightful that the international think tank Cato Institute had already requested President Trump to reconsider South Africa’s membership to the Agoa trade agreement earlier this week due to expropriation without compensation and its effect on minorities. The FF Plus will make very sure that America gets the full picture of what is really going on in South Africa and not the twisted, diluted version put forth by the ANC. What is happening in South Africa comes down to serious human rights abuses and the world must let the ANC know that it is totally unacceptable. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 23 August 2018