Hawks nab four men outside Delmas court after they appear for cash-in-transit heist 21 August 2018 Four men have been arrested outside the Delmas High Court in Mpumalanga, shortly after appearing in connection with a cash-in-transit heist case, the Hawks said on Tuesday. The men were arrested on Monday - one in connection with a foiled heist in Limpopo and the other three in connection with a 2016 heist in Mpumalanga. Hawks spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi said the four men were arrested after they appeared in court alongside alleged heist kingpin Wellington Cenanda. They are out on bail in that case in which they face several cash-in-transit-heist-related charges. "They thought it was business as usual when the court was adjourned. Little did they know that the Hawks were a step ahead of them. The moment they left the courtroom, the Hawks pounced on them," Mulaudzi said. 'Hijacked a passing motorist' Mulaudzi gave details of the cases for which the men had been arrested on Monday. He said one was allegedly linked to another foiled heist in Gravelotte, Limpopo in August 2016. The man allegedly formed part of a 12-strong armed group of people who attacked an armoured vehicle in Gravelotte. They had been travelling in three different cars. "The armoured vehicle was shot at and the armed crewman returned fire. One of the suspects' vehicles attempted to ram the van but lost control and crashed. The suspects allegedly hijacked a passing motorist and the group fled the scene empty handed." Mulaudzi said the man, who was "known to the Hawks", could not be named until he appeared in court on Tuesday on charges of attempted murder and armed robbery. The three others, Sam Masinga 43, Jan Makitla 43, and John Rahube, 37, appeared in the Carolina Magistrate's Court on Monday in connection with a heist in Carolina, Mpumalanga in March 2016. The men are accused of participating in an attempted armed robbery where they allegedly attacked an armoured vehicle on the R33 Wonderfontein in Carolina. "The armoured vehicle was sprayed with bullets, prompting the armed guards to retaliate and after an aggressive standoff, the armed group also left empty handed," Mulaudzi said. The case has been postponed to August 30 for a bail application. In a separate incident, six others are expected to appear in the Pretoria Magistrate's Court on Tuesday. The men allegedly ambushed an armoured vehicle in Hans Coverdale West, east of Eersterust in December last year. Mulaudzi said they allegedly bombed the armoured vehicle, "ripping it apart" and made off with an undisclosed amount of money. One was arrested immediately, and further investigation led to the arrest of five others in Soshanguve and Limpopo. Several rifles and explosives were confiscated. News24