ANC’s call for fresh elections in Tshwane and CoJ a cheap political gimmick defying voters’ choice 27 August 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes the press conference by the ANC Deputy Provincial Chairperson, Panyaza Lesufi, where he made remarks regarding the state of DA-led coalition governments and his party’s decision to call for fresh elections in the City of Tshwane. Lesufi stated that the call for a fresh election is for “the of people of Tshwane [to] elect a government of their choice”. This latest political gimmick by the ANC is ironic considering that the people of Tshwane in the 2016 Local Government Elections elected a government of their choice and voted the ANC out of power. The residents of Tshwane gave a mandate for the DA and other opposition parties to form a coalition government to administrate the business of the City and deliver services to its residents. Over the past two years in the City of Johannesburg and the City of Tshwane, Mayors Herman Mashaba and Solly Msimanga uncovered 22 years of billions in rands of looting, corruption and abuse of the people’s money to fund the ANC’s elections. In just two years, the DA-led coalitions governments of Johannesburg and Tshwane have turned things around and the two metros are thriving. In Johannesburg: - The City closed out the 2017/18 financial year with an improved performance in the unaudited financial reports. Cash reserves now stand at R1.9 billion with R6 billion in loans now repaid; - Over 2 000 title deeds have been delivered to residents who have waited for the dignity of home ownership for many years, and the City has started delivering services to 51 informal settlements neglected by the previous administration; and - With 1 500 more Johannesburg Metro Police Department (JMPD) Officers on the streets, the City has become much safer than before. In Tshwane: - The DA inherited a R2 billion deficit from the ANC, however, in the 2016/17 the City closed out at a R704 operating surplus; - Mayor Msimanga sold the so-called “Mayoral Mansion” for R5.1 million in order to build houses for the disadvantaged. Proceeds from this sale are already being used to build more than 40 houses for those without; and - Following much-needed reforms to root out corruption, the Capital City has allocated R137.2 million towards the Extended Public Works Programme (EPWP) initiatives this financial year. This will lead to more jobs and skills for the unemployed. These are only a few examples of the DA difference. Unlike the ANC, we have put the people of Johannesburg and Tshwane above petty politics and have exposed and rooted out corruption, created jobs, tackled crime, delivered service and given our people the dignity of a roof over their heads. Whilst the ANC continuous to destabilise legitimate and democratically established governments in our metros, we will continue to do the work of bringing tangible change and building One South Africa for All. Issued by Solly Malatsi,DA National Spokesperson, 27 August 2018