The Congress of the People (COPE) in the Free State and the National Office would like to pronounce as follows on the following issues : 1. LAND REFORM. *The position that has been articulated by our President, comrade Mosiuoa Lekota, regarding our support for the present constitution and its property clause reflects the policy position of our party and we support him 100%. No distortions and distractions like imbecilic racist attacks and insults will deter him and COPE from telling the truth. All sound minded people in our country agree that the constitution does adequately cater for restitution and redistribution. Both the NDP and the Kgalema Motlanthe High Level Panel makes sound and proper observations and recommendations on land reform, which we support. COPE stands for a responsible land reform programme and shall never mislead our people for cheap popularity just to win votes. The problem with land reform is the absolute failure by successive ANC governments since 1996 to properly and effectively implement the provisions of the constitution. This is because of incompetence and corruption. Out of desperation and blatant opportunism occasioned by dwindling voter support, they now jump into the irresponsible bandwagon of cheap populism and misplaced militancy that threatens to tear apart the very foundational values of nation building. We are aware that parliament has resolved to undertake a constitutional review process on the matter and we will be mobilising like minded forces to make our submissions when the right time comes. We are confident that by 30 August 2018 we shall be proven right again. 2. ON STOKING OF RACIAL HATRED. We have noted with interest how the ANC and the EFF are stoking racial hatred in the country by dividing the country between the so called "our" people and the rest. This is shortsighted approach aimed at 2019 elections and is a recipe for disaster. We want to remind the ANC that it was Nelson Mandela who taught all of us to build a future where there is no white domination and black domination. As the Congress of the People, we are going to embark on a process of a consultatations with other patriotic stakeholders, NGO's, CBO's and other political parties to discuss and develop a response to the threat to the constitution of the Republic and nation building. 3. THE NARRATIVE OF A STOLEN LAND. *We agree with the ANC that the narrative of a "stolen land" is a false narrative. We call on the ANC to pronounce themselves, unambiguously and  as to whether they have now changed historical policy and abandoned the Freedom Charter in favour of the racist rhetoric of both the EFF and the PAC. In closing we want to remind all South Africans that COPE is home for ALL people, black and white, who want to achieve responsible land reform and build a prosperous nation. Statement issued by Congress of the People  Free State Congress Provincial Committee and COPE National Office, 4 March 2018