Statement on Ms Suzanne Daniels Friday, 16 March 2018: The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) last week ruled that Ms Suzanne Daniels’ suspension undertaken by the previous Board of Eskom was unfair. Eskom respects this ruling and has not made a final decision on whether it will review this decision or any aspects of it. The CCMA, in making its ruling last week, did not make any ruling on the disciplinary charges that were put to her in 2017 and as such a disciplinary process in regard to those charges is continuing. In addition, Ms Daniels was served with new disciplinary charges this week. These charges relate to serious misconduct which Ms Daniels is alleged to have committed in (amongst other things) distribution of confidential information, settlement of the McKinsey/Trillian matter and payments made to McKinsey and Trillian, as well as her involvement in the Optimum and Tegeta prepayments and guarantee issued by Eskom. The new Board is aware of the actions which Ms Daniels took in dealing with the McKinsey/Trillian matter in August to October 2017, including investigating payments to these entities and issuing a letter of demand regarding these matters on behalf of Eskom. These were commendable actions by Ms Daniels, however, notwithstanding these actions, it is still necessary for Eskom to address Ms Daniels’ actions and conduct in relation to the serious matters contained in the additional charges of misconduct against her. The new Board at Eskom is approaching the new and existing charges related to Ms Daniels with a fresh mind and must act in the best interests of Eskom when serious charges of misconduct by any employee are uncovered. Eskom believes that given her position, the serious nature of the charges and the ongoing investigations Eskom is undertaking, it would not be correct for Ms Daniels to return to Eskom at this stage. However, Ms Daniels was given an opportunity this week to make representations regarding why she should not be suspended. She has made representations and Eskom is considering these and will make a decision on whether or not to suspend her in the next couple of days. Statement issued by Eskom, 16 March 2018