THE EFF STATEMENT ON THE LIFE ESIDIMENI ARBITRATION OUTCOME 20 March 2018 The EFF notes and welcomes the Life Esidimeni arbitration outcome delivered by the now retired Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke. The arbitration outcome vindicates all the families who lost their loved ones, civil society and opposition parties who stood up when it was not fashionable to call out the the ANC government implementing the ill-conceived, corrupt and greed driven plan that resulted in the death of 144 patients. The EFF also welcomes the decisive position taken by Justice Moseneke that those involved must be held accountable, and we call on all authorities such as the South African Police Services (SAPS) and the HPCSA (Health Professional Council of South Africa) to carry out their investigation with due diligence to ensure that those who violated the law are charged and prosecuted accordingly. Whilst we note that money can never replace any lost lives, it is nonetheless a much needed and good intervention thus far. We call on the government to pay the families as instructed by Justice Moseneke and within the prescribed timeframes. While we acknowledge and recognise the work of civil society, lawyers and intermediaries, we do however like to send a strong warning for them not to steal money meant for victim’s families, as it is intended for specific purpose including assistance with recovery from such a traumatic experience. The events of Life Esidimeni, particularly taking into account the arbitration judgement by Justice Moseneke, is a clear demonstration that our public health system has collapsed due to the failure of the ANC government post 1994 to envisage a more inclusive, caring and capable system for all South Africans. Even after such a tragedy, we still have more than 40 patients who are missing and no one can account for their whereabouts. Unless something drastic is done to eradicate corruption, build more hospitals, re-open nursing colleges as a matter of urgency and build a far much capable and responsive public healthcare, many of our people especially the poor, women and children, and people living with disabilities will continue to die without anyone facing consequences. South Africa must never see a recurrence of such tragic events due to poor governance, corruption and maladministration by the ANC government. Issued by Mbuyisni Quintin Ndlozi,National Spokesperson, EFF, 20 March 2018