Child Nutrition- South Africa’s biggest opportunity 29 March 2018 Malnutrition in Africa has, as its stock standard image, the pot-bellied orphan with skinny arms and legs gazing out of NGO posters imploring for donations. But in South Africa, malnutrition has a significantly different face – that of a number of children in the country. Currently, four children die of malnutrition related causes in South Africa a day. In hospitals across the country, emergency rooms have dedicated posters explaining protocols for malnourished children on the ward walls as the rate at which children are admitted is significant. While the cases of malnutrition in hospitals is shocking enough, the issue of undiagnosed long- term malnutrition and its effect of development are also cause for concern. A lack of decent nutrition can cause developmental and physical issues which becomes permanent and later effects their abilities as adults. This is specifically an issue in our country as it is estimated that 77% of children between the ages 6-23 months do not receive a basic nutritious diet. Children who are stunted tend to be lethargic, they are often sick, they lose their sense of curiosity, they struggle in school, they tend to repeat grades and often leave school all together. While mothers may do their best to provide filling meals, the standard basic meal stuffs eaten in South African homes, mainly cereals and maize, do not provide all the nutrition children need. This harm to the developmental wellbeing of the child is part of a larger cycle which continues to entrench and expand inequality in the country. As a result of a lack of a basic amount of cash, parents are not able to provide their children with nutritious meals which causes these children to develop slower or stunt their development entirely. These children then must go to school, already disadvantaged by their development problems, and are left with little ability to achieve grades which would contribute towards enabling them to break out of the cycle of poverty. As we head into our Federal Congress in April, the Democratic Alliance will engage on a number of pledges aimed at improving the socio-economic conditions of poor South Africans and one such pledge will be on the state of basic child nutrition. At this moment in time, the issue of income for families needing to feed their children should be being addressed by the Child Care Grant provided by the government. However, the grant currently sits at R380 a month which is well below the cost of feeding a child a decent meal nevermind covering all the expenses of raising a child. If the Child Care Grant was raised to be at the food poverty line (R531), or event better to the amount needed to feed an 18-year old boy sufficiently (R733), this would go a long way to slowing down developmental problems and prevent deaths from malnutrition. This would mean that children would enter school having been provided with the correct nutrition to develop properly. They would be able to focus and achieve grades which could allow them to study further and access levels of education previously closed to their families. In turn, the knock-on effects for the individual and the country as a whole would be substantial. South Africa has many social issues that need to be addressed, such as inequality, poverty and poor education, and basic child nutrition is the start of the solution to many of these problems. The DA believes that an investment in decent, balanced nutrition for the country’s children is an overall investment in the future of South Africa. By Karen Jooste is the DA’s Deputy Shadow Minister on Social Development, 29 March 2018