Register to vote for total change Note to Editors: the following remarks were made today by DA Leader, Mmusi Maimane, during a registration drive in Kaalfontein, Johannesburg. Maimane was joined by the Mayor of Johannesburg, Herman Mashaba, and DA Regional Chair, Heinrich Volmink. It’s great to be here in Gauteng, the economic heartland of our beautiful nation. Gauteng’s residents are leading our country in more ways than one. The people of Gauteng are leading South Africa in terms of economic activity, innovation and growth. The people of Gauteng also are leading in living out the dream of a rainbow nation. In restaurants, workplaces, shopping malls, places of worship – wherever you look you see the dream of ’94, a non-racial South Africa, integrated South Africa. This we must celebrate. But, most important of all, the people of this province are leading our nation in voting for a better government and brighter future for themselves. Gauteng has showed that change only comes at the ballot box, where citizens show the powerful and corrupt politicians who is in charge. We are calling on every resident to register to vote this weekend. We have begun the movement for change here on Gauteng soil. Let’s continue this in 2019 – and that begins by registering this weekend. The power to shape the future is in your hands! In the last General Election in 2014, the ANC held onto power in this province by the skin of their teeth. They were 3% away from losing Gauteng. That election began the province-wide movement to bring real change. In the 2016 Local Government Elections, the people chose new governments in the City of Johannesburg, as well as in the capital city of Tshwane. This was a seminal moment in our young democracy, and showed politicians from across the spectrum that we are a nation of active citizens who will unapologetically hold the government to account. As leader of the DA, I want to both welcome and encourage this core tenet of democracy, and urge citizens to fearlessly hold every political party to account at the ballot box – the DA included. The power is and always will be in the hands of the people, not politicians. Over the past year and a half, the people of this province have chosen change, and have seen the fruits of this change. Here in Johannesburg, under Mayor Herman Mashaba, the DA-led government has begun to bring total change and roll back the over two decades of neglect. Within 18 months, the DA-led government has: Uncovered close to R17 billion in fraud and corruption, with almost 100 employee suspensions, 13 employee resignations, and 9 dismissals for involvement in corrupt and suspicious dealings; Allocated R105 million for the installation and repair of broken traffic signals throughout the City. This year alone, 89 intersections were re-cabled and are now joint free; allocated R10 million for the purpose of establishing opportunity centres which will provide much needed training for prospective entrepreneurs and job seekers; set aside R12 million to provide for on-the-job artisan training for 340 youths within the City; More than doubled the previous sanitation budget, increasing it from R17 million to R40 million; Saved almost R500 million through the introduction of cost-cutting measures focused on reducing self-promoting advertising, marketing, domestic and international travel, consulting and professional fees, and conferences and seminars; Rolled out extended operating hours at 13 clinics across Johannesburg, including clinics in Princess Park, Freedom Park, Randburg, Protea Glen, El Dorado Park and Zandspruit; Extended operating hours at 10 of our regional libraries – some open until as late as 22h00. Libraries in Jabavu, Orange Farm and Diepsloot being but a few; Working towards ensuring that a cleaner living environment is not reserved for just a few by setting aside R482 million within Pikitup’s budget for cleaning informal settlements over the next three financial years; Allocated R1.9 billion to upgrade 50 informal settlements in the medium term; Acquired three 3 new fire engines to increase the City’s ability to secure the safety of our residents; and Launched a brand new K9-Narcotics Unit to tackle hijackings, robberies, bombs, kidnappings and drug-related incidents. Those who are elected into public office are servants of the people. And for as long as I am the leader of the DA, our party will always be a service delivery orientated party. We ask you to lend us your vote for five years, and if you feel we have failed you, vote us out. That is democracy. And that is why I am so passionate about getting every South African out to register to vote in next year’s election. In order to register, citizens must visit their nearest voting station with their ID document to register to vote, or amend voting details. For any further assistance, you can visit www.da.org.za, or send a WhatsApp to 084 000 2019. Voters can also verify their details online at check.da.org.za, and also locate their nearest voting station should they need to reregister. Additionally, voters will be able to check and correct their voter details including their address, and first-time voters will be able to register to vote. Issued by the DA, 10 March 2018