Mashaba to intervene on behalf of Property Owners 7 March 2018 Following engagements between the City and the Independent Municipal Valuer, I am pleased to announce that 8000 property owners will begin receiving Section 78 Notices for properties that appear to be over-valued. This process now means that the owners of these 8000 properties will begin receiving, from next week, Section 78 Notices which will provide revised valuations. The notices will also make provision for a 30 day period during which property owners can provide relevant information to be taken into further account during the review process. These properties will be placed on the Supplementary Valuation Roll. In cases such as this, the City must assume the burden to address the problematic valuations before the implementation date on 1 July 2018. This differs from the conventional objections process which places the burden on account holders to object to the valuation and motivate for its adjustment. These 8000 valuations, which have been identified as problematic, have experienced considerable increases, many over 100% which have been profiled in the public since last week. To date the City has also received 4000 objections to the valuation roll. Through engagements between the City and the Independent Municipal Valuer, the City will begin handing over these objections to the Municipal Valuer without waiting for the 6 April 2018 deadline for objections. This will result in the City beginning work on these objections immediately, and being able to issue revised valuations to property owners without delay. The focus of our efforts is ensuring that our residents find the valuations processes to be more responsive and efficient than it has been in the past. Already, our online information resources have greatly improved residents’ access to assistance and information. Further to this, the capacitation of our walk-in centres is being addressed to deal with the increase of residents seeking assistance with their objections. When we took office, we committed to a set of non-negotiable values, which included being a caring and responsive City. In the wake of some of the cases that have come to the fore this week, the City cannot fold its hands and adopt an uncaring attitude towards its residents. As resident and business owner in the City for over two decades, I personally understand the burden that property valuations can place on families and businesses. I thank the residents for their patience and commit the City to working tirelessly to achieve what is a fair outcome. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 7 March 2018