No ‘New Dawn’ for SASSA under Shabangu as millions may not receive their grants 14 March 2018 Confusion seems to be the order of the day, as SASSA told Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Social Development that new service provider for cash payment would only be ready in July. The agency also admitted today that it still does not have any feasible contingency plans in place in the event the Constitutional Court declines an extension of the illegal CPS contract. This completely contradicts announcements made at a press conference last week by SASSA CEO, Pearl Bhengu, that there were in fact plans in place for cash payments come the April 1st deadline. It is now clear, however, that there are no plans in place and that Bhengu was less than truthful when she addressed the nation. The reality is that there are two weeks left until the illegal CPS contract expires and SASSA, the agency responsible for social security, have no plans in place to ensure that the 2.8 million grants recipients who receive cash payments every month receive their grants without interruptions. What’s even more concerning is that Social Development Minister, Susan Shabangu, has not said a single word regarding this impending debacle. This points to her not having the political will, nor the appetite, to sort out the mess left behind by her predecessor, Minister Bathabile Dlamini. Her silence speaks volumes about her interest in the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable. It is evident that no one at SASSA and at the Department of Social Development seems to know what they are doing and how to prevent another social grants fiasco. The public, and most importantly the 2.8 million grant recipients who depend on cash payment every month, needs answers as time is rapidly running out. SASSA is once again holding a gun to the heads of the Constitutional Court and the South African public to push this illegal CPS contract down our throats. Issued by Bridget Masango, DA Shadow Minister of Social Development, 14 March 2018