Lesufi must prioritise School Safety and infrastructure in Gauteng 12 March 2018 The DA is calling on the Gauteng Department of Education MEC, Panyaza Lesufi to prioritize school infrastructure In the province. School infrastructure across the province is poor and safety is a serious challenge. During the DA’s visits to Phuthaditshaba Primary School and Phelindaba Secondary School in Atteridgeville, Pretoria today, we discovered that these schools’ infrastructure is dilapidating. Phuthaditshaba Primary School has 36 classrooms in total which includes 9 mobile classrooms which are in a terrible state. The school is in desperate need of 9 brick and mortar classrooms. The classroom windows are broken and the floor tiles are peeling off and are riddled with potholes. The schools around Attridgeville have had numerous burglaries were schools valuables were stolen. Two weeks ago, Phuthaditshaba Primary School was broken into and most of their administration-related equipment was stolen. A case was opened at the SAPS and to date the criminals have not yet been caught. The same applies to Phelindaba Secondary School where there have been 3 breaks-in this year where 4 smart boards, laptops, calculators and computers had been stolen. The school is still waiting for the Department to replace the 4 stolen smart boards. The DA is appealing to the communities to take ownership of their schools and declare war against criminals who are targeting our schools. There is no maths and science teacher at this school and despite the Department being aware of this, there are no plans yet to fill this most post. Bullying and violence amongst the learners is a challenge and teachers claim that they are not safe at this school. The classroom ceilings are broken, windows are broken and the electricity wires are exposed, posing a danger to both learners and teachers. The computer lab, science laboratory and library are not functioning due to a lack of equipment and resources. The Department is failing to provide proper maintenance and quality infrastructure in our schools. Our schools are going to experience the worst case scenario this financial year considering that the schools infrastructure budget has been slashed by almost R500 million. This is as a result of the Department’s failure to spend its allocated infrastructure budget. The DA will hold MEC Lesufi to account to ensure that there is proper maintenance of infrastructure in these schools. We will be tabling questions in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature to determine what measures are in place to ensure high safety standards in schools across Atteridgeville. Gauteng schools infrastructure is in crisis; there is a need for Total Change and the DA is the only political party that can bring about that change. Issued by Khume Ramulifho, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 12 March 2018