Police call for information after body found in burnt Taxify vehicle Johannesburg – Police are investigating a case of murder following the discovery of the remains of a man inside the boot of a burnt Taxify Chevrolet Aveo near the Unisa Sunnyside campus on Thursday night. Sunnyside police spokesperson Captain Daniel Mavimbela said it was unclear at this stage what the motive for the murder was. "The identity of the deceased is yet to be confirmed," said Mavimbela. The police are appealing to anyone with information that might lead to an arrest to contact the local police station on 012 422 3600 or send an anonymous tip-off to Crime Stop on 08600 10111, or SMS Crime Line on 32211. Taxify spokesperson Gareth Taylor said the company was working with the police on the incident. The company is expected to release a statement shortly. News24 Update: Taxify investigating murder of driver found in boot Johannesburg – Taxify is investigating the murder of Siyabonga Langelihle Ngcobo who was found in the boot of a burnt vehicle on Thursday night. "Taxify's high-priority team is currently investigating this as a matter of urgency to aid police in their investigation," said Taxify's country manager, Gareth Taylor. According to Sunnyside police spokesperson Captain Daniel Mavimbela, Ngcobo's body was discovered in a Chevrolet Aveo near the Unisa Sunnyside Campus. Mavimbela said the circumstances surrounding the murder were being investigated. The company was deeply saddened by Ngcobo's death, said Taylor. He said the company had contacted his family to ensure their safety after the incident. "Taxify is dedicated to making trips safer for drivers and riders. One such way is through partnerships. For this reason, Taxify has partnered with Namola. "Namola is a mobile app that helps users receive emergency assistance at the push of a button when users need it most." The company encourages all drivers to download the app. "Other measures that Taxify has taken to improve safety include the continuous building of relationships with law enforcement, regular communicating with drivers about possible high-risk areas, and setting up a dedicated high-priority team that deals with cases related to safety." Namola EMS Group CEO Peter Matthaei said: "The tragic passing of Mr Ngcobo is both sad and unnecessary. Through our partnership with Taxify, we are working to ensure that incidents like this are easier to prevent in the future. Namola's priority is to ensure all our users are able to get help fast in any emergency situation." News24