 Greetings to all of you gathered here today. It gives me great pleasure to officiate this press gathering this afternoon, together with the National Commissioner of the SAPS General Kehla Sithole; on such an important task of officially announcing the new senior appointments of Lieutenant Generals who will be taking over new responsibilities as Divisional and Provincial Commissioners of the South African Police Service. The new appointments to the top level echelon of the police hierarchy, in the post of Divisional Commissioners, Crime Intelligence, Detectives and Protection and Security Services as well as the Provincial Commissioner of Free State consists of men and women of exceptional calibre and renowned credentials in the different fields of expertise. The SAPS continues to advance and upholds the fundamental principle of excellence and professionalism in implementing the recruitment strategy. Members of the media, the fight against crime requires crime intelligence that is focused and progressive. The need for a complete overhaul of that environment remains a priority for the new leadership. Equally, Detective Services needs re-engineering and repositioning in order to do justice to its core business of resolving crime. We are confident that the new breed of leadership will improve efficiency and effectiveness in the business of policing and further contribute positively in the implementation of the turnaround plan as championed by the National Commissioner. Moreover, the police machinery requires individuals with wealth of knowledge and understanding in the various disciplines. Ladies and gentlemen, we remain strongly entrenched in the ideals of progressive leadership hence we pride ourselves in the following appointments: CRIME INTELLIGENCE Major General Anthony Jacobs is appointed as the Divisional Commissioner of Crime Intelligence at the level of Lieutenant General. Lt Gen Jacobs joined the police in 1995 when the Statutory Forces were incorporated into the Service. At the time of his appointment he was attached to Western Cape Province as a Cluster Commander of Wynburg. He has a vast experience in operational policing including the crime intelligence   environment, having occupied various senior managerial positions that include provincial head of crime intelligence and border management. He has also gained valuable experience in the operational environment when he worked as a Deputy Provincial Commissioner: Operational Services, Provincial Commander for Provincial Operational Command Centre, Operational Response Services and Police Emergency Services. He has a Master of Science Degree in Corporate Security from Cranfiels University, United Kindom (SAQA accredited at M Tech Degree) DETECTIVE SERVICES Major General Tebello Constance Mosikili before her appointment as the Divisional Commissioner, Detective Services at the rank of Lieutenant General, was serving as the National Head of Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit, a position she has held with distinction since 2016. Mosikili is an investigative expert, with 17 years of her total 27 years in the police served at investigation environment at various levels. She is a service oriented professional who has served at all the spheres/levels of policing, having been a station commander, cluster commander, provincial commander as well as section head at national level. Lt Gen Mosikili is a career police officer who went through all the ranks to get to the position of Divisional Commissioner. She is an investigative solutions and strategic leader who brings with her a wealth of investigative as well as operational expertise coupled with her understanding of the criminal justice system. She has a B Tech Degree from Tshwane University of Technology (Technikon South Africa) as well as capacity development courses that include Advanced Psychologically Motivated Crime, Exercise Cyber Tracks and Detective Commander’s Course. PROTECTION AND SECURITY SERVICES Major General Samson Shitlabane is appointed as the Divisional Commissioner of Protection and Security Services at the level of Lieutenant General. At the time of his promotion Lt Gen Shitlabane was the Gauteng Provincial Head: Protection and Security Services. Since his enlistment into the police in 1995, Lt Gen Shitlabane has served from the lower level ranks as a close protector in the Protection and Security Service and has moved up the ranks in the same environment at various positions – positions such as National Commander for Deputy President which included servicing former state presidents and Section Head: VIP Protection Services. He has a wealth of knowledge in the protection and security services environment and his appointment will bring about efficiency and effectiveness. Shitlabane is in possession of a Bachelor of Policing Practice Degree and is due to complete his post graduate diploma in Management (Security field) with the University of Witwatersrand. PROVINCIAL COMMISSIONER FREE STATE Major General Moeketsi SEMPE is appointed as the Provincial Commissioner of Free State, with immediate effect at the level of Lieutenant General. At the time of his appointment Lt Gen Sempe was the Deputy Provincial Commissioner of Policing at Free State. He joined the police in 1993 and started working in the community service centre. In 1996 at the level of Sergeant, he became a Shift Commander at Excelsior Police Station in the Free State. He moved up the ranks in operational environment serving as a station commander, cluster commander and has also occupied several senior management positions at provincial level since 2008. As a the Deputy Provincial Commissioner. Lt Gen Sempe therefore, brings to the position a vast experience in policing with impeccable knowledge of policy frameworks. He is an energetic visionary with proven leadership skills. He has a Magister Technoligae (MTECH) in Policing and has successfully completed several operational courses and management and leadership programmes. Ladies and gentlemen all four strategic appointments are aimed at responding directly to the core mandate of fighting crime and furthermore ensuring that the people of South Africa are and that they feel safe. We wish to thank the sterling leadership of the National Commissioner and his team in facilitating the new appointments. The business of squeezing crime to zero continues... Issued by SAPS, 29 March 2018