ANCKZN CONDEMNS THE SENSELESS KILLING OF ITS VOTING DISTRICT COORDINATOR AND TWO COMMUNITY MEMBERS The African National Congress (ANC) in KwaZulu-Natal is shocked, outraged and saddened by the brutal murder of its elections coordinator and two community members who were gunned down by unknown assailants in Imfume village. Cde Nqobizwe Mkhize, 42, was assassinated in the early hours of today (Saturday) at his residence in Imfume, Ward 105 of eThekwini Municipality. He was an ANC VD coordinator responsible for the coordination of our organizational programmes related to election mobilization. While escaping the scene, the assassins fired shots at two other community members who sadly also lost their lives. It’s sad that yet another dark cloud of brutal killings has engulfed our province. Details regarding Cde Mkhize’s murder remain sketchy but it appears that he was attacked while sleeping at his home. He was shot in the presence of his wife also sleeping in the same bed. The attackers instructed his wife to cover herself while they opened fire on Cde Mkhize and left him dead on the scene. This dastardly assassination of Cde Mkhize leaves a huge void in the ranks of the ANC, the alliance and the mass democratic movement in general. He was a true revolutionary who served our community with dedication. His outstanding leadership skills will be sadly missed by many in the ANC especially those who benefited from his unparalleled wisdom. The ANC lost Cde Mkhize in a very critical open voter registration day while tasked to coordinate the programme to encourage people to register and check their addresses. “We are shocked and outraged by a mysterious murder of Cde Mkhize and we find his murder as an act of cowardice and an attempt to weaken the ANC. This has been a stable ward that was redemarcated from Umdoni (Lower South Coast Region) to eThekwini Municipality. We are hopeful that the law enforcement will work hard and apprehend these murderous. For us losing a member tasked with critical work of our movement brings a lot of pain. We commit ourselves to pick up his spear and soldier on with the struggle for the betterment of our people’s lives,” said ANC Provincial Interim Committee Coordinator, Cde Sihle Zikalala. Cde Zikalala urged members of the public to assist police with the information that could lead to the arrest of the assassins. The ANC extend its heartfelt condolences to Cde Mkhize’s family, community of Imfume, comrades, friends and families of the two community members who also died in the same incident.  Statement issued by Cde Sihle Zikalala, ANCKZN Provincial Interim Committee Coordinator, 10 March 2018