ANCKZN CALLS ON UMLALAZI COMMUNITY TO EXERCISE CALM The African National Congress (ANC) in KwaZulu-Natal has expressed concern about the unrest and violent protest experienced in Eshowe under Umlalazi Municipality earlier today. The violent protest broke out after a security guard allegedly shot dead a young man who had been found fishing allegedly without permission at Gqobhokani farm. The incident took place in Ward 9 on Wednesday. The man, 29-year-old Gift Siphamandla Xulu, died while his friend managed to escape unharmed during the confrontation with the security guards. Police later arrested the security guard and charged him with murder. The ANC is worried about the brutal murder of Xulu as it believes that arresting him would have been a proper reaction to whatever crime he is alleged to have committed. However, the disruption of normal civilian life and closure of the R66 Road that links the communities was also concerning. Regardless of the police quick response to the murder of Xulu, community took to the streets and barricaded the road with burning tyres, set alight the sugar cane plantations and a farmhouse. “We are very much concerned about the situation in the area. The murder of the community member by the security guard is uncalled for. We call on the community members to work closely with the law enforcement agencies since the security guard is now arrested,” said ANC KZN Provincial Interim Committee Coordinator Cde Sihle Zikalala. He warned the community not to take the law into their own hands. “To resort to violence and the destruction of property is not a solution. We call upon the people of Umlalazi to remain calm and place their hope and faith in the hands of the law enforcement agencies who are on the ground to ensure that order prevails,” he said. Cde Zikalala added that the ANC understands the pain that the community of Umlalazi is going through but stressed that breaking the law will not fix anything as the police will be compelled to arrest all those involved in any form of violence in the area. The ANC finds solace in the fact that someone has been arrested by the police. “We urge our community to remain vigilant against thugs who want to reverse the gains made since 1994 by plunging the province into chaos last experienced before our democratic dispensation. The community should exercise calm and tolerant during this time and not inconvenience others.” The ANC extend its sincere condolences to the family, friend and the community of Sphamandla Xulu. Statement issued by Cde Sihle Zikalala, ANCKZN Provincial Interim Committee Coordinator, 15 March 2018