PREMIER ZILLE CONGRATULATES WESTERN CAPE BATHO PELE WINNERS Premier Helen Zille has congratulated Western Cape Government departments and professionals who received awards at the National Batho Pele Excellence Awards over the weekend. The awards honour outstanding departments and professionals for outstanding governance and service across all administrations in the country. Some of the outstanding winners from the province include: Category: Best Head of Department (Provincial) Gold Award – Mr. Solly Fourie (Department of Economic Development and Tourism); Silver Award (joint) – Ms. Jacqui Gooch (Department of Transport and Public Works); as well as Mr Brian Schreuder (Western Cape Education Department) – and; Bronze Award - Mr. Gideon Morris (Department of Community Safety). Category: Best Functioning Provincial Department of the Year Silver Award - Western Cape Education Department; and Bronze Award (joined) – Department of Transport and Public Works, Department of Economic Development and Tourism, and Department of Cultural Affairs and Sport. | “We commend the efforts of our outstanding professionals who work tirelessly to provide the best service possible to citizens. Our vision of becoming the best run regional government in the world would not be possible without these individuals and teams that make up our government,” said Premier Zille. The Batho Pele Awards follow the recent Audit Excellence Awards presided over by Auditor-General Mr. Kimi Makwetu in Cape Town. At the ceremony, the Western Cape led the country in clean audits with an overall rating of 85% clean audits. The second closest was Gauteng with 52%. Meanwhile the Western Cape remains the top performer in the Presidency’s Performance Management assessment – known as MPAT. “We inherited a government with zero clean audits back in 2009, and we have come a long way due to an incredible team effort. We remain determined to keep delivering for citizens during our remaining time in office,” said Premier Zille. Statement issued by Western Cape Premier, Helen Zille, 5 March 2018