SAPU calls for conclusion of Phahlane trial 3 September 2018 The South African Policing Union has noted with grave concern the apparent delay of the corruption and fraud trial of the then Acting National Police Commissioner Lieutenant-General Khomotso Phahlane. We have raised our reservations about these delays-could this be another Richard Mdluli episode where the suspended General is given an opportunity to milk millions of Rand while sitting comfortably at home. As we were given the impression that the Independent Police Investigative Directorate has a watertight case against General Phahlane why there are delays now? We are not by any means defending General Phahlane. If he has a case to answer he must be given his day in court. As the saying says justice delayed is justice denied.  Its either Phahlane is swiftly and successfully prosecuted or his suspension lifted. It is just unfair to thousands of officers who are working day and night to have a senior commander paid millions of Rand for doing absolutely nothing. Mdluli enjoyed paid holiday for over 7 years enjoying taking his kids to school and back. SAPU is not prepare to allow a situation like that to repeat itself. If there are doubts about Phahlane’s case, he must be allowed to work for his salary. The misuse of taxpayers’ money cannot go unchallenged. It is abnormal that the taxpayer is footing the bill for two people, the other is compensated for doing absolutely nothing whilst the other is doing the actual job for the person who is at home. We would also like to know the real status of General Phahlane’s suspension in terms of SAPS disciplinary procedure. The regulations dictate the term of suspension, the process to follow in formulating charges, the hearing process and the conclusion. How far is the SAPS in terms of charging General Phahlane internally. The disciplinary process is a separate issue from the criminal proceedings. Issued by Tumelo Mogodiseng, Acting General Secretary, SAPU, 3 September 2018