DA launches petition calling for ANC’s Cyril Ramaphosa to testify before the Zondo Commission The Democratic Alliance (DA) has launched a petition calling for ANC President, Cyril Ramaphosa, to testify before the Zondo Commission of inquiry into state capture and explain why the governing Party allowed this project to flourish under its noses for so long. The petition can be accessed here and we encourage all South Africans to sign it to ensure all those who contributed or stood idly by while South Africans were robbed, are held accountable. Testimonies presented before the Zondo Commission have made it abundantly clear that it was not just Jacob Zuma, his family and the now-infamous, Gupta family, at the centre of the state capture robbery project. It was the entire African National Congress, including President Cyril Ramaphosa, who knew this theft was happening and did nothing to stop it. There is no doubt that the state capture project was conceived, nurtured and executed directly under the nose of the ANC National Executive, within the Zuma cabinet and in the ANC caucus. The ANC majority in Parliament failed to take decisive action for eight years during which the scourge of state capture extended its tentacles over the Union Buildings, Luthuli House, SARS, Hawks, NPA and state-owned entities. Claims by President Ramaphosa and other ANC leaders’ that they were not aware of what was happening is insulting to millions of South Africans who now have to shoulder the financial burden of state capture through multi-million Rand bail-outs, VAT increases and fuel price hikes. Ramaphosa’s ANC cannot escape complicity in aiding and abetting state capture as their indifference allowed state capture to flourish. State capture is one of the biggest heists ever committed against the South African people. The ANC must be held accountable for their role in this crime and testify before the Zondo commission. South Africans deserve to know the truth. Statement issued by John Steenhuisen MP, Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance, 9 September 2018