ANC KZN statement on the release of Moerane Commission report on murders of political leaders 27 September 2018 1. Introduction The African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal notes and acknowledges the tremendous work done by the Moerane Commission of inquiry into the murder of politicians notwithstanding the limited time and resources. As the Leader of Society, the ANC exercised political wisdom and insight by calling for the setup of the Commission to deal with unpleasant incidents of murders of politicians. The ANC welcomes the report as an important step in creating a peaceful and prosperous province and commit to playing its full role in implementing the recommendations of the report. The ANC called for the commission of inquiry into the murder of politicians after noticing unabating incidents of political violence. At the outset, we want to salute all those courageous men and women who took part in assisting the commission for they had to re-live the pain and loss, open wounds and share stories about their loved ones as part of the process of nipping this cancer of murder of politicians in our province in the bud.  To us, as the ANC the report represents not just the end but the beginning of an important journey to nurture the process of peace.  The report re-awakens many difficult and troubling emotions.  This is so because as the ANC we lost many of our leaders in these violent attacks directed at political leaders. Indeed as expected the pain has often been unbearable at times as we went through the details of the agony that some of our Comrades went through.  The work of the commission is now bringing us at least to some understanding about what happened and the underlying issues to enable us to respond decisively so that the journey towards a peaceful province we ushered in 2004, is never reversed. Since the ANC ascended to the helm of this province in 2004, there has been an entrenchment of democracy and the longest period of peace and tolerance. As the ANC, we commit to ensuring that all acts of wrongdoing identified in the report are tackled head-on so that all the elements that tarnish the image of our province are exposed and flushed-out. We subscribe to the notion that it is not the absence of challenges but the manner in which we respond to challenges that determine whether as the society we swim or sink. There is a saying that goes “a problem identified is a problem half-solved” and this is the direction the report is taking us to. Following the tabling of the report of the Moerane Commission of Inquiry last Thursday in the Provincial Legislature, the African National Congress commended Provincial Premier, Cde Willies Mchunu and the entire executive council for the manner in which they handled the work of the commission. The ANC is committed to working with all political parties through the Multi-Party Committee involving leaders of parties to ensure that our province has peace and free from political murders. 2. ANC to act firmly We believe that the release of the report marks the beginning of a new chapter in our movement. We must emphasise that we will act with haste against anyone within our ranks found to have played a part in these criminal activities and we appeal to all other political parties to do the same. In pursuit of the above, the ANC will simultaneously uphold the basic principle of assuming that any potential wrong-doer is innocent until proven otherwise. Whilst upholding this principle, we are also of the firm view that the seriousness of the alleged crime will also cajole the suspected ANC member to undergo self- introspection and be guided by their moral and political conscience to step aside - out of their own volition - from active participation in party political activities to prevent further harm to the ANC image until such time the legal processes have come to their conclusion. 3.  Implementation of the recommendations We have commenced with the process of implementing the recommendations.  We have assigned a team made up of comrades John Jeffreys, Cde Mxolisi Kaunda, Cyril Xaba, Bheki Ntuli, Nonhlanhla Khoza which is led by the ANC Provincial Spokesperson Nomaggu Simelane-Zulu. The report of the commission and its implication will be tabled to the Provincial Working Committee and there after map out the implementation plan. We reaffirm our commitment to promote political tolerance, unity, peace, freedom of choice, expression and association in this province. 4. On the arrests In the past weeks, the ANC was seized with the arrest of people allegedly linked to the murders of our activists. We note and appreciate the progress that the police seem to be making in this regard.  We are pleased that police seem to have made a breakthrough to the murder case of Cde Sindiso Magaqa with the arresting of a suspect as well as those allegedly linked to the murder of Cde Musawenkosi Mchunu. These matters are still in court and we will wait patiently for the conclusion of these cases.  It is the position of the ANC that anyone accused has the opportunity to clear themselves in a court of law.  As the ANC we will respect the rule of law and abide by the court decisions. The ANC applauds the inter-ministerial committee in the security cluster that was set up by President, Cde Cyril Ramaphosa in May 2018 for the good work to ensure that, the law enforcement agencies track down suspects in a number of cases involving murders of politicians. For the past two months at least 28 suspects linked to assassinations of political leaders have been nabbed through the work of the ministerial task team that comprises the departments of justice, police, state security and defence. The ANC also notes the murder conviction case against the ANC General Gizenga Regional Secretary comrade Musa Zondi. We will await the final sentencing and thereafter the ANC will follow its constitution in handling its internal processes. Accordingly, we call on all ANC members to avoid a temptation of using these ongoing cases as instruments to further sow divisions. The ANC will continue to follow all the cases with keen interest. In Conclusion the Provincial Legislature will be swearing-in comrade Super Zuma as the Member of the Provincial Legislature, the ANC Congratulates and wish him well in his new responsibility. Issued by Nomagugu Simelane-Zule, Provincial spokesperson, ANC KZN, 27 September 2018