State Security Agency must probe plot to remove Ramaphosa 19 September 2018 The DA is calling for an investigation by the State Security Agency into the meeting that reportedly took place in early September involving former president Jacob Zuma and senior members of the ANC, including Secretary-General Ace Magashule, former North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo, and ANC Women’s League Secretary-General Matuba Meokgo. It would be easy to dismiss the meeting at the Maharani Hotel in Durban, which reportedly also involved the former SAA Chairperson, Dudu Myeni, and criminally-convicted Nelson Mandela Bay Councillor, Andile Lungisa, as an internal party matter. However, if reports are to be believed, the subject of discussion was nothing less than the removal of the President of South Africa. If true, the meeting was an effort to undermine our constitutional order and those who participated in it may be guilty of a criminal offence. The seriousness of the allegations cannot be overestimated. We cannot allow infighting of the failing ANC to undermine South Africa’s constitutional democracy. This plot proves yet again that the failing ANC is incapable of changing and that its internal party conflicts threaten to destabilise a country that is already in a technical recession plunging millions of our people into unemployment and poverty. The meeting also illustrates how today’s ANC is no different from the Zuma-era ANC, replete with the same corruption-tainted officials and failed premiers, now recycled into even more senior positions under President Cyril Ramaphosa. Instability in the ANC cannot result in instability of the country. That is why it is essential that the Minister of State Security, Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba, orders an investigation into this matter urgently to determine the nature of the gathering and whether or not any of the discussions centred on the removal of President Ramaphosa which could destabilise South Africa. Issued by Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA National Spokesperson, 19 September 2018