The text of two speeches made by President Ramaphosa in the New York follow below: OPENING REMARKS BY PRESIDENT CYRIL RAMAPHOSA AT THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS MEETING COUNCIL OFFICES 24 SEPTEMBER 2018 NEW YORK, USA Ladies and Gentlemen, Thank you for this opportunity to share with you some perspectives on the challenges and opportunities of the current global environment. As you would be aware, this year South Africa is celebrating the centenary of the founding father of our democracy, President Nelson Mandela. This celebration has provided us with an opportunity to reflect on the progress we have made as a young democracy and the tasks that still lie ahead of us. It has also reinforced the need for South Africa to continue to build on the legacy of President Mandela in working towards a peaceful, just and prosperous world. We remain inspired by the role he played as a bridge-builder and seek to follow his example in bringing together divergent perspectives. At this moment in global history, as we seek to navigate the challenges confronting the political, security and economic architecture that has evolved over the last 70 years, we are convinced of the value of Mandela’s approach to consensus-building and the peaceful resolution of conflict. This view is reinforced by a number of disturbing global developments. The resurgence of geopolitical rivalry, which has not been experienced since the Cold War era, has huge implications for international peace and security. There is a growing challenge to important multilateral arrangements, characterised by the withdrawal from commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, on climate change, financing for development and in nuclear non-proliferation. The rise of trade protectionism threatens the multilateral trading system we agreed in Marrakech in 1994 and Doha in 2001. There appears to be little prospect of the resolution of intractable conflicts in the Middle East and in Africa, nor has the international community managed to effectively address growing political intolerance, acts of terrorism and right-wing extremism. While globalisation has brought many opportunities and much progress, it has also contributed to growing inequality among states and within states. These challenges are by no means insurmountable. However, they do require a return to a cooperative and inclusive approach to international relations. The idea that might is right is wrong. There is an opportunity for the world leaders, international organisations and civil society to work together to restore the primacy and relevance of multilateralism. At the same time, we need to emphasise the importance of a more proactive approach to the maintenance of international peace and security. We can do that by paying particular attention to preventive diplomacy, which should be supported through closer coordination and partnership between the United Nations and regional organisations such as the African Union. We need to strengthen the rules-based international trading system and move with speed to transform other multilateral institutions and global governance structures to be in line with the current realities of the 21st century. This should include reform of the UN Security Council, which is limited in its ability to respond to current security challenges by virtue of its structure, composition and relative lack of accountability. For the global development agenda to succeed we have to ensure the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its means of implementation, the Climate Change Paris Agreement and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on financing for development. To do so, we need to build meaningful partnerships between UN member states, international organisations, civil society organisations and the private sector. As South Africa, we are determined to use every means at our disposal, including our participation in global forums, to advance the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and to consolidate regional integration. We are working together with our fellow African countries to establish a Continental Free Trade Area, which would fundamentally transform Africa’s economies and consolidate the continent’s position in the global trading system. This dream – of a single African market for goods and services – has been made possible by sustained economic growth and greater political stability. Despite the progress, however, there are still areas where instability and conflict continue to cause great misery and hardship. We are still confronting challenges in places like South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Central African Republic, Lesotho and areas of the Great Lakes, the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin. South Africa will continue to play its part in conflict resolution in these areas, and in combating threats to regional and international peace and security. South Africa will take up a non-permanent seat on the Security Council from next year to December 2020. We will dedicate our tenure on the Security Council to continuing the legacy of Nelson Mandela, whose values of peace, reconciliation and respect continues to inspire Africa and indeed the whole world. In line with the philosophy and practice of the Mandela years, South Africa continues to seek warm fraternal relations and strong economic ties with all the countries of the world regardless of size, influence or alignment. We remain firmly committed to rules-based multilateralism as the most sustainable and effective approach to the management of international relations – and will continue to advocate for the needs and interests of developing countries to be placed at the top of the international agenda. I thank you. Issued by the Presidency, 24 September 2018 *** REMARKS BY PRESIDENT CYRIL RAMAPHOSA AT THE UNITED NATIONS PRIVATE SECTOR FORUM LUNCH, UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 24 SEPTEMBER 2018, NEW YORK, USA Excellencies, Members of the Global Compact, Members of Civil Society, Ladies and Gentleman, Thank you for inviting me to speak at this important luncheon on the margins of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit. We appreciate the vision of the members of the Global Compact who have taken it upon themselves to consider the role that the private sector can play in building and investing in peace. This debate is taking place in the context of the centenary of the birth of our founding President Nelson Mandela, who dedicated his life to the achievement of peace, reconciliation and justice. Despite progress in many areas, peace continues to elude many countries. War and conflict continue to take lives and ruin lives, to destroy economies and to impoverish peoples. We know the limits of peace keeping operations alone. There are too many countries that have slipped back into conflict because peace agreements have not been followed by post-conflict reconstruction and development. Far too often, conflict could have been avoided by multilateral interventions and effective engagement between parties before a crisis escalates into violence. It was for this reason that the UN decided to establish the Peacebuilding Commission to take up the responsibility of coordinating efforts towards building and investing in peace. The Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts can only succeed with the support of political leadership and their partners, like those in the private sector. Peace, stability and the rule of law are critical for economies to thrive and for businesses to achieve sustainable returns for shareholders. The private sector therefore has a direct interest in the preservation or restoration of peace. Many of today’s conflicts, particularly in our continent of Africa, arise from developmental challenges. As countries emerge from conflict, they face the challenge of rebuilding the state, which includes building infrastructure, establishing resilient public institutions and restoring the economy to health. This is where the private sector can play a critical role, working in partnership with civil society and political leadership. There is no lack of plans and strategies for consolidating peace; only a lack of implementation. Beyond political commitment and goodwill, these programmes require financial, human and technological resources. Many of these resources and many of these capabilities reside in business. It is therefore necessary to develop mechanisms to mobilise such resources in support of peace building. More broadly, it is important to jointly promote post-conflict development so that companies have the confidence to invest in countries that are emerging from war and that these countries have the policies, institutions and social stability needed to attract investment. Investment is necessary to promote economic progress and stability, while stability is an important condition for investment. To ensure that this becomes a virtuous circle – rather than a vicious cycle – requires a social compact which clearly delineates the respective responsibilities and expectations of all partners. This requires the involvement of political leaders, business leaders, unions and other social formations – supported wherever possible by international organisations like the UN or continental bodies like the African Union. This centenary of President Mandela offers all of us an opportunity to reflect on progress and challenges, and the work we still need to do to advance peace. We have this morning through the Political Declaration adopted by the Summit declared the next 10 years to be the Nelson Mandela International Decade for Peace. We should seize the opportunity of this decade to rally behind a common agenda for peace. For our part, we are committed to work together with the UN and the members of the Global Compact to ensure that we build a strong and lasting partnership that will deliver not only peace – but also prosperity – to all the people of the world. I thank you. Issued by the Presidency, 24 September 2018 