Commercial banks must refuse to be dragged into DA trap 25 September 2018 Absa, Nedbank and the Banking Association of South Africa are the latest victims that will be hauled to a standing committee of the DA-run Western Cape legislature to advance the DA campaign against the expropriation of land, says the ANC Western Cape. The banks are due to show up at the 8.30 am meeting of the committee on economic opportunities, tourism and agriculture tomorrow (26 September 2018). They are under the guise to be quizzed about the effects of land expropriation on bonded farm and urban property in the province. ANC Western Cape spokesperson in the committee Nomi Nkondlo says: “The DA wants to interfere in the business of banks and duplicate a process which is already taking place at national level. In fact, the province has no legal mandate to interrogate the banks. The committee in this instance has no business in national law-making or in the process at this stage to change a section of the country’s Constitution. “The ANC says banks should not fall into the DA trap or be allowed to be abused as a pawn in a petty party political game. The banks must also not be squeezed into appearing as they are in the DA pockets as they are the bankers of DA-led governments like the Western Cape or Cape Town. “These commercial banks should not respond to a personal bid of an individual or certain individuals as the whole committee did not consider this call. It is an alternative process outside of the committee and no consultation took place about it. “The banks will do much better to keep a safe distance from politicians like some DA leaders who are hell-bent on discrediting all other parties and will have no scruples in dragging the banks into the political fray. The banks must stay clear of this quirk mire and maintain a safe independent distance. “Further to that the DA has enough leeway to deal with the matter in the national Parliament where the DA is duly represented and may ask questions and get information at its heart’s delight. The DA is advised not to abuse the provincial legislature for its quest, but to instruct its representatives in the national Parliament to deal with the matter properly at that level.” Issued by Cobus Grobler on behalf of ANC Western Cape, 25 September 2018