NW residents are not safe in their homes while ANC spends billions to protect VIPs 11 September 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West is not surprised by the latest crime statistics. The ANC has failed our communities on all levels - on service delivery and, even more so, on safety and security. In North West, 49 more people were murdered than in the previous year, meaning that 950 people were murdered here from March 2017 to April 2018. The rise in the number of stock theft and murders of farmers and farmworkers confirm the need to re-instate the special rural safety units. North West and Limpopo currently suffer the second most farm murders in the country. The ANC has ignored the DA's pleas to bring back the units to protect our vulnerable rural communities. It is shocking that most of these murders take place in the victims’ houses and it is no wonder that people in North West no longer feel safe in their own homes. In SA 57 people are murdered per day and indeed, it resembles a warzone, that has been allowed to flourish under the failing ANC. While communities in North West live in fear the ANC spends billions to keep VIPs safe. On average R9 million is spent per year to keep one VIP safe while there is a mere R1 500 per year available to protect one ordinary citizen. We understand the importance of VIP protection but this is just another example of the ANC’s skewed priorities. It is up to South Africans to choose a party who puts their safety and that of their families first. SAPS in North West is under-resourced, under-trained, under-equipped and under-staffed which means they are losing the battle to keep South Africans safe. The Rustenburg Police station is amongst the top 30 police stations in the country with the most reported serious crimes and we call upon Minister Cele to immediately attend to shortages and challenges at this station. The 2017/2018 crime stats report also revealed that in North West: - Robbery with aggravating circumstances increased with 3.2%; - Cash in transit robberies increased with a staggering 475%; - Sexual assault increased with 8.8%; - Another 864 people were victims of attempted murder; - Car-hijackings increased with 9%; - 1145 people were victims of house robberies; - Stock-theft increased by 8%; - Common assault increased by 11%; - The illegal possession of fire-arms and ammunition also increased by more than 8%; and - Arson reported incidents increased with more than 11%. These crime statistics, and the victims behind these gruesome numbers show that the failing ANC cannot bring order or keep our people safe. Only the DA is able to make our police service an honest, professional organisation that serves and protects South Africans. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader, 11 September 2018