Outcomes of DA FedEx 18 September 2018 This morning the Democratic Alliance’s (DA) Federal Executive (FedEx) met in Cape Town. The Federal Leader, Mmusi Maimane, informed FedEx that he has decided to decline the request for him to stand as the DA’s candidate for Premier of the Western Cape. This was a request that required careful consideration and consultation with the relevant Party structures which made the initial request to him. The DA’s national electoral objectives stand as Mr Maimane’s number one priority, and the Party stands behind his commitment to build a better South Africa and stronger DA. It is essential that we grow our support across the country in order to bring change that builds One South Africa for All. Change founded on a commitment to fight corruption, create access to real, long-term jobs, overhaul the South African Police Service to make it honest and professional, secure our borders and speed up the delivery to basic services. That is our mission, and that is where we must focus our time and effort over the course of this election, leading a new generation of leaders who can realise the potential of our great country. Later today FedEx will meet again to consider which candidate in the Western Cape will be selected as the DA’s candidate for Premier in the province. We will communicate this outcome at that stage. Secondly, FedEx considered the results of the Selection Panel for the Mayoralty of the City of Cape Town. A number of truly excellent candidates applied, including Sharna Fernandez, Ian Neilson, Heinrich Volmink, Brett Herron, and Dan Plato. All the candidates were highly competent and capable. It is a testament to the DA’s work in Cape Town over the past decade that a pool of such notable talent has developed over time. The Selection Panel interviewed and ranked these candidates and is then required to make a recommendation to FedEx. The Panel recommended that Dan Plato be the DA’s Mayor of Cape Town, and FedEx has this morning ratified that decision. FedEx warmly congratulate Mr Plato on his nomination, pledge to him our full support, and wish him every success in the task ahead.  As the DA, we are confident that Mr Plato will continue the progress we are making in the City of Cape Town. Tomorrow, the Party will hold a press briefing with the Western Cape leadership, Cape Town mayoral elect and the province’s Premier Candidate to deliver our vision for both the City of Cape Town and the Western Cape. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA National Spokesperson, 18 September 2018