Police Committee concerned by high murder rate 11 September 2018 The Portfolio Committee on Police is concerned about the increasing murder rate in South Africa. The committee today received the annual crime statistics and there is a marked upward trajectory in the murder rate. “It is unacceptable that the murder rate has been on an upward trajectory since the 2012/13 financial year. The increase of 6.9% year on year from the last financial year point to the ineffectiveness of interventions implemented by the South African Police Service (Saps). Significantly more targeted interventions must be implemented to reverse this worrying trend,” said Mr Francois Beukman, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee emphasised the need for a strategic intervention from Saps, not merely operational or tactical responses. As a remedy, the committee has recommended that Saps management strengthen cluster and station management, especially in the top 30 crime hotspots. Strengthening cluster and station management will improve the strategic and tactical intervention in fighting crime, especially contact crime. The committee has for a while now called for the re-introduction of specialised units, as it is of the view that they are vital in focusing the crime prevention plan. It is high time that the Saps management urgently implement the National Development Plan recommendation on the National Police Board, as well as re-introduce specialised units trained to deal with specific crime. “The committee is of the view that the need for specialised units to deal with gang and taxi-related crimes is long overdue. Safety and security is one of the important pillars of an economically growing country that is able to create job opportunities for the people of the country,” Mr Beukman said. Furthermore, the committee has encouraged the review and renewal of the Saps Act and Fire-Arms Control Act to bring them in line with new crime developments and ensure a policing framework that is able to deal with changing crime trends. Also, the National Development Plan made recommendations on a framework for a community-based plan to fight crime. “Crime is a societal problem and the police must develop and urgently implement a new model for police community interface that will galvanise the entire society to the fight against crime,” Mr Beukman said. The committee reiterated its call that policing should move towards intelligence-led policing as a key approach to deal with serious and violent crime. Also, the use of technology as an operational tool and force multiplier must be urgently considered, budgeted for and implemented. Issued by Malatswa Molepo, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Services, 11 September 2018