Mahumapelo and his detractors to work together on ANC North West task team Some of Supra Mahumapelo's most vocal detractors will have to work with him as part of a provincial task team (PTT) seeking to rebuild a fractured organisation ahead of the 2019 elections. The ANC confirmed on Thursday that Mahumapelo, the party's former North West chairperson, was part of a 32-member PTT. The team is to be led by the North West premier, Job Mokgoro, who took over from Mahumapelo when he was forced to resign as premier of the province in May. Makgoro has been appointed convenor of the conference and Keinetswe Mosenogi has been appointed co-ordinator. ANC secretary general Ace Magashule announced that the task team would be supported by eight national executive committee (NEC) members. This follows last month's NEC decision to disband Mahumapelo's provincial executive committee. Some in the NEC claimed that the political party continued to suffer, even after Mahumapelo stepped down from his government role. Others accused him of launching parallel processes and conferences in the platinum-rich province. China Dodvu, Philly Mapulane, Mmoloko Cwaile and Zac Tolo, who was once a favourite to replace Mahumapelo as premier, are just some of the former premier's detractors who now have to work with him in the hope of assisting the ANC to retain the province in next year's polls. Sources previously told News24 the NEC did not want Mahumapelo in the PTT but that he was approved by the ANC' s national working committee during a meeting on Monday. Magashule, however said the decision was a unanimous one. " In our collective wisdom, I can tell you we agreed unanimously that these are the men and women who can take this province forward during this period and time," Magashule explained to journalists. Here is a full list of the ANC North West PTT members: 1. Job Mokgoro (convener) 2. Kenetswe Mosenogi (co-ordinator) 3. Saliva Molapisi – KK 4. Susan Dantjie – Bojanala 5. Gordon Keagile – RSM 6. Wendy Nelson – KK 7. Mahloa Malaoa – veteran 8. Desbo Mohono – Bojanala 9. Dr Motlhabane – RSM 10. Linah Miga– NMM 11. Mpho Khunou – Bojanala 12. Asnath Molekwa – Bojanala 13. Supra Mahumapelo – NMM 14. Grace Moipolai – RSM 15. China Doduvo – KK 16. Kim Medupe – Bojanala 17. Kabelo Mataboge 18. Lerato Teme 19. Sello Lehari 20. Rose Diphoko 21. Nono Maloyi 22. Thlapi Tsotso 23. Philly Mapulane 24. Rosho Motlalepule 25. Mmoloki Cwaile 26. Girly Nobanda 27. Thato Mogogodi 28. Ntsesang Montewa 29. Zacharia Tolo 30. Elizabeth Mabebe 31. Patric Chauke and 32. Fenny Gaolaolwa News24