ANCKZN SHOCKED BY THE ARREST OF ITS COUNCILLOR LINKED TO THE MURDER OF ITS MEMBER The African National Congress (ANC) in KwaZulu-Natal has noted with shock and dismay the charging and arrest of one of its councillors in Umsunduzi Municipality. This is in connection with the murder of comrade Msawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu. The ANC believes in the rule of law and has confidence in the criminal justice system. Importantly, the ANC is calling upon all our members to co-operate with the law enforcement agencies in this matter. Whilst, the principle of innocent until proven guilty is acknowledged in a democratic society such as ours, the ANC believes that the allegations are extremely serious and deserves our special attention. This is informed by the fact the province of KwaZulu Natal has experienced the killing of politicians and   with many of our comrades becoming victims. In this regard, we support all efforts of law enforcement agencies aimed at getting into the root cause of these killings.  In addition, we are hopeful that the justice system will do its work independently and with speed. Finalizing this matter quickly will allow the ANC to start its internal disciplinary process in order to send a strong message, where it’s necessary. The ANC leaders have a responsibility to be exemplary in society. Having one of our councillors implicated in murder is not only disappointing but calls for the ANC to be firmer on matters of discipline and personal conduct of its members. Despite this, the ANC in this province has undertaken to use Thuma Mina Campaign to mobilize communities to stand together in defence of our freedom and democracy. It is the view of the ANC leadership in the province, regions and branches that freedom is threatened each time any member of society is murdered irrespective of their position in society. The ANC provincial leadership will intensify the rollout of programmes aimed at achieving unity of its members and its alliance partners.  Unity in action, which is part of our culture and tradition as the ANC and its Alliance, will also be the same unity in action that will help us to deal with current and future challenges. Statement issued by the African National Congress KwaZulu-Natal, 10 September 2018