DAFF is complicit in the blatant looting of our oceans 12 September 2018  The Democratic Alliance in the Western Cape is in possession of a charge sheet which details the crimes committed in the fisheries sector by Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) Deputy Director-General, Ms Siphokazi Ndudane, as outlined in a disciplinary hearing held on 3 September 2018 at the Department’s offices in Pretoria. Of the 39 charges brought against Ms Siphokazi Ndudane, she has been found guilty of, among others, 155 counts of fraud, 37 counts of theft, extortion, forgery, defeating the ends of justice, insubordination, and the contravention of section 217 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic 108 of 1996. These counts include the following: Given the seriousness of these charges considering the crisis the Western Cape province is currently grappling with in relation to organised and drug-related crime linked to international abalone poaching syndicates, and a failure by the Department to empower small-scale fishermen and women through the efficient awarding of fishing quotas, the following questions must be asked: The Department has yet to take any decisive action against this criminal behaviour by Ms Ndudane when it has now been proven that she has blatantly and tragically abetted the illegal abalone trade in the Western Cape which continues to ravage both our oceans and our small fishing communities. On 27 March 2018, I wrote an open letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa asking him to urgently address the corruption in the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in the interests of our fishing sector. My request fell upon deaf ears. I have invited DAFF Minister, Senzeni Zokwana and his officials on numerous occasions, the most recent being on 20 June 2018, to appear before my Standing Committee to explain these allegations, which have now been revealed to be truths. To this day, the Department has failed to appear before the Western Cape Provincial Parliament and dodged accountability at every turn. I will now be writing to the Public Protector to request a formal investigation into the senior management of the National Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, including Minister Senzeni Zokwana, Siphokazi Ndudane, Tembalethu Vico, and Nazima Parker. The corruption which continues to fester within this Department must be rooted out as a matter of urgency. I will also be consulting with my legal advisors to determine whether the party can lay further charges against the Department in light of these shocking revelations. As the DA in the Western Cape, we remain committed to protecting and preserving the vitality of our oceans, along with the important economy and jobs they sustain for our people. This includes rooting out the corruption which festers at the heart of the DAFF and threatens to collapse the Western Cape’s fisheries. We will not rest until this Department is cleaned out and functioning to best serve the people who depend on it. Statement issued by Beverley Schäfer, MPP, Standing Committee Chairperson on Economic Opportunities, Tourism, and Agriculture, 12 September 2018