DA-led anti-corruption drive saves Johannesburg residents R18 billion 4 September 2018 The DA-led coalition government in the City of Johannesburg has saved Johannesburg residents more than R18 billion in just under two years by exposing fraud and corruption in the city. The city allocated R38 million towards the fight against corruption during its 2016/17 financial year, and its newly launched internal anti-corruption unit, launched two years ago, is investigating more than 3500 corruption cases. This anti-corruption unit has made significant progress in building relationships with law enforcement authorities to have cases effectively prosecuted. The city’s anti-corruption measures have led to the arrest of 700 people, the dismissal of 28 city employees and suspension of another 18. More than 30 cases are currently before the courts and 25 hijacked properties have been returned to their rightful owners. We are investing a huge amount of time and effort into stamping out corruption and are committed to ensuring that those who steal public funds are held accountable. Our anti-corruption drive has further exposed the fact that under the ANC administration 19% of the city’s budget was stolen through corruption. This included R6 million that was used to purchase 500 computers that were never delivered, R80 million worth of City Power equipment that has been seized from sub-contractors and a R28 million revenue refunds scam, through which city officials wrote off residents rates and tax bills in exchange for bribes. Databases of indigent residents have also been cleaned up, removing the names of hundreds of city and government officials who were benefiting improperly from services that were meant to go to the poor. Money previously lost through corrupt activities is now being put to good use and spend on fast-tracking services for millions of poor people in Johannesburg. The DA has zero tolerance for corruption, both in the public and the private sector. Corruption steals from the poor and must be stopped. This is the beginning of real change, that builds One South Africa for All. Issued by John Moodey, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 4 September 2018