Moerane Commission: ANC abuse of power behind the political bloodbath in KZN 20 September 2018 The Moerane Commission report, tabled earlier today in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature has vindicated the DA’s long-held belief that the political bloodbath in the province is the result of a dysfunctional and failing ANC which is rife with corruption, particularly at local government level. The long-awaited report into the reasons behind politically motivated murders in KwaZulu-Natal has painted a dangerous behind-the-scenes picture of an ANC-led provincial government that has failed to deal with an abuse of power as well as the lack of separation between party and state by its own officials. The DA believes that the findings of the Moerane Commission are extremely damaging to the failing ANC and that its leadership in this province should hang their heads in shame. These murders are happening on their watch. Their own Comrades are killing each other. Those who are fighting against corruption are also being killed. Furthermore, the Commission’s concerns around what is a largely ineffective provincial police force and a judicial system that has failed the people of KZN to date are entirely warranted. To date there are no convictions for these crimes - even while the report shows that it is possible to identify the ringleaders. The time has come to move from who pulls the trigger to who orders the hits. To do this there must have increased crime intelligence in KZN. The DA has long called for this and we note the Commission’s support of this view. Other areas of concern to the DA include; - The failure by eThekwini Municipality Mayor Zandile Gumede to abide by the Commission’s request for information around Glebelands. This is the height of arrogance and speaks directly to where her priorities lie; - The Premier’s failure to extend the Commission’s terms of reference to 1994 or 1996. In stating that they start from 2011 he has limited the Commission’s findings in terms of politically-related deaths in our province; - The Commission’s statement that it was delayed by insufficient resources. This while more people were dying in our province. Yet another damaging view expressed by the Commission is that the concept of a democratic society is under threat in our province, with political competition and its attendant violence leading to voters being unwilling to engage and increased voter apathy. This ‘capture’ is evidenced by the ANC’s determination to politicise community structures. This is creating an unhealthy environment where civic organisations no longer have a voice and where there is no accountability from government. The Commission has recommended that an investigative task team including outside objective consultants and multi-party representation be launched. The DA supports this move. We also expect KZN Premier Willies Mchunu to hold his CoGTA MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube and her Department accountable for what is happening at local government level. This is where the problems begin. The DA therefore calls for the following measures to be implemented without delay: - Enforcement of the Councillors’ Code of Conduct; - Enforcement of the MFMA – which clearly outlines the role of Councillors when it comes to tenders etc; - Appointment of Councillors based on merit rather than political connections; - Proper training of Councillors so that they know the boundaries of their role and - Education of communities so that they understand the parameters under which Councillors operate The Moerane Commission’s report would not have been tabled today in this House were it not for the pressure by the public of KZN and opposition political parties. The reason for this is simple – the failing ANC does not care about the safety of KZN’s people. It only cares about votes ahead of next year’s election. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango, DA KZN Premier Candidate, 20 September 2018