ANC silence and inaction on Bosasa corruption speaks louder than words 27 September 2018 It has been 25 days since the Bosasa scandal broke. The ANC governments’ silence and inaction on this matter calls into question President Cyril Ramaphosa’s apparent commitment to rooting out corruption which is endemic in the Party and the government. President Ramaphosa talked tough on corrupt officials at the United Nations yesterday, saying “those who are found to have done wrong should be able to face the might of the law”. He also claimed that South Africa’s criminal justice system would be hard at work sweeping out graft in the private and public sectors. The latest corruption scandal to hit the failing ANC government revolves around reports that several key ANC officials and national Ministers received security upgrades and other benefits from Bosasa, the controversial facilities management company, also known as African Global Operations, which then secured contracts worth R10 billion from various government departments. DA Chief Whip, John Steenhuisen, has already reported ANC MP Vincent Smith to Parliament’s Ethics Committee and laid criminal charges against him and the other implicated ANC officials for allegedly receiving benefits from Bosasa. Smith, Minister of Mineral Resources, Gwede Mantashe; Minister of Communications, Nomvula Mokonyane; former SAA Chairperson, Dudu Myeni; Deputy Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Thabang Makwetla, and several other ANC members reportedly received security upgrades from Bosasa. Action speaks louder than words. While it is easy to talk tough on corruption, the ANC’s complete silence combined with the lack of action on this matter proves it is not serious about rooting out corruption. It also shows that there is no real commitment to ensuring that those involved in the Bosasa scandal are held accountable. The corruption of the ANC government is oppressing South Africans and there is no indication that any action will be taken to root it out. The DA has shown that we take corruption seriously and act against those who are implicated. We will continue to fight corruption and to ensure that public money goes to citizens to improve their lives. By voting DA in 2019, South Africans can ensure change that builds one South Africa for all, not only the corrupt elite. Issued by Phumzile van Damme, Team One SA Spokesperson on Corruption, 27 September 2018