Matika madness continues under guidance of Collen Maine 3 September 2018 The Democratic Alliance in the Northern Cape denounces the lack of urgency with which the ANC is dealing with the unresolved Mayor Mangaliso Matika matter. The failing ANC behaves like community frustrations towards Matika just flared up overnight but in actual fact, the people’s sentiments towards poor governance in Sol Plaatje Municipality have been bubbling over for more than two months already. The failing ANC had all this time to deliberate on issues affecting service delivery in Kimberley and come up with a clear-cut solution but instead, they have brought in ANC Youth League Leader, Collen Maine, just to tell the people of Kimberley that the failing ANC must conduct its own investigations. Clearly, the failing ANC does not care about the people of Kimberley. Already, we are awaiting an overdue report on the section 106 investigation into Sol Plaatje Municipality, from MEC of COGHSTA, Bentley Vass. How long must the people wait for another investigation and where is the transparency? Vass has remained suspiciously silent on the Matika matter. I have personally had interactions with him and he has failed to get back to me. I am starting to suspect that he is also part of the Matika madness, just like ANC Provincial Chairperson Zamani Saul and current Sol Plaatje Municipal Manager, Ruth Sebolecwe. We are moving into the last quarter of the year that is by nature a very busy period. Matriculants are preparing for examinations. Businesses, that took a knock during the last Kimberley shutdown, and have yet to recover their losses, are preparing for the festive season. Our children and our economy cannot afford any disruptions. Yet the failing ANC is avoiding decisive action against Matika and is instead taunting residents, by avoiding acknowledgement of the seriousness of the community’s grievances. It is almost as if the failing ANC wants to pursue a state of chaos and disorder in Kimberley - possibly to pursue their own underhand agenda? The DA will never accept Matika as the Mayor. The majority of councillors in Sol Plaate have no faith in him and we are considering tabling another motion of no confidence against him. Only change under a DA-led government will put an end to the ongoing shenanigans within Sol Plaatje and ensure that the people of Kimberley can enjoy transparent and accountable governance. Issued by Andrew Louw, DA Northern Cape Provincial Leader, 3 September 2018