ANC KZN shocked by gruesome killings in the institutions of higher learning 17 September 2018 The African National Congress (ANC) in KwaZulu-Natal is shocked and saddened by the loss of lives at the different Institutions of Higher Learning in Kwa Zulu Natal. The stabbing of a student from the University of Zululand, a shooting of a Durban University of Technology (DUT) student and another student at University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) who was stabbed to death is deeply distressing. An ANCYL member Cde Nqobani Dlomo was brutally murdered allegedly by another student in the Oval Residence, Westville Campus of UKZN. Cde Dlomo was also in the Students Representative Council’s election list to be held at the end of the month. The DUT student, Cde Sikhumbuzo “Shakes” Lushaba was shot dead near students’ residents in Albert Park on Friday. Cde Lushaba was an active member of ANCYL, YCL, and Sasco in the university. As the African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal our thoughts and prayers are with the families and the loved ones of the deceased. The Regional officials of Musa Dladla are currently engaging with relevant authorities to get details that will inform us on the details and participation of the UniZulu student, and this will inform our interventions at that institution. The ANC is deeply concerned about the sudden rise of violence in our tertiary institutions. It goes without saying that our educational institutions must be places of intellectual learning and not of violence and murders. We call on the recently launched Provincial Council on Social Cohesion and Moral Regeneration co-chaired by our Premier Cde Willies Mchunu and Bishop Emeritus Rubin Phillip to give special attention to this violent behavior in our institutions of higher learning. We also call on law enforcement agencies and the university management at these institutions to speedily investigate and bring the alleged perpetrators of this weekend murders to justice. We further call on all our structures in all campuses to engage on matters of safety and security and take active steps to make our campuses safer. The future of our country is in the hands of our youth. The role of our universities is to produce the human resources capacity for the development of our nation. Every death robs a family and our nation at large of a young person who can contribute to a better life for all. Where ever we are, let us work together to make our universities and our communities safer. The ANC also condemns the senseless murder of the IFP leader Mr Zakhele Mazibuko who was ambush while travelling back from Escort to Ladysmith after a party meeting on Saturday. We are very much concerns about prolongation of murders in the province. The ANC calls on the law enforcement agencies to intensify their investigations to unearth the reasons of the murder of the politician and ensure those involved pay for their sins. The ANC sends its heartfelt condolences to the Mazibuko family and three students’ families whose lives perished in the institutions of higher learning premises. We want to ensure them that the ANC understands the pain they are going through during this difficult time. Issued by Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu, Provincial Spokesperson, ANC KZN, 17 September 2018