ANC KZN says councillor arrested for murder of fellow party member 11 September 2018 An ANC councillor in the Umsunduzi municipality in Pietermaritzburg has been arrested for the murder of another ANC official, the party said on Monday. Msawenkosi "Qashana" Mchunu who was the party's convenor of branches in the Moses Mabhida Region, was shot dead in his driveway in KwaPata, Pietermaritzburg on the evening of May 11, this year. Police were not available to confirm the arrest. However, ANC KZN spokesperson Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu said the party had noted with "shock and dismay" the arrest of a fellow councillor for Mchunu's murder. "Having one of our councillors implicated in murder is not only disappointing but calls for the ANC to be firmer on matters of discipline and personal conduct of its members," she said. Simelane-Zulu said the ANC believed in the rule of law and had confidence in the criminal justice system. "Importantly, the ANC is calling upon all our members to co-operate with the law enforcement agencies in this matter. Whilst, the principle of innocent until proven guilty is acknowledged in a democratic society such as ours, the ANC believes that the allegations are extremely serious and deserves our special attention. This is informed by the fact the province of KwaZulu-Natal has experienced the killing of politicians and with many of our comrades becoming victims," she said. She said they hoped that the justice system would do its work independently and speedily. "Finalising this matter quickly will allow the ANC to start its internal disciplinary process in order to send a strong message where it's necessary," said Simelane-Zulu. She said despite this, the ANC in KZN had undertaken to use the Thuma Mina (Send me) campaign to mobilise communities to stand together to defend freedom and democracy. "It is the view of the ANC leadership in the province, regions and branches that freedom is threatened each time any member of society is murdered irrespective of their position in society". The ANC provincial leadership will intensify the roll out of programmes aimed at achieving the unity of its members and its alliance partners, she said. KZN police were not immediately available for comment at the time that the ANC's statement was released. News24