Parliament enhances security and rolls out professional support to parliament staff and Garane family following tragic incident 17 September 2018 The Parliamentary community is still reeling from the shock following the tragic death on Friday of Mr Lennox Garane, who was a Section Manager for Policy in the International Relations and Protocol Division of Parliament. The 57year old, Mr Garane, was appointed on a five-year contract on 1 October 2013. The management of Parliament has visited the family of Mr Garane and is providing support and counselling services in line with the policy of Parliament. A programme of counselling staff members affected by the untimely death is being provided at various sites within the Parliamentary precinct from Monday 17 September 2018. These professional counselling services will be available on a 24hour basis thereafter, as and when required by the staff. The investigations by both the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the State Security Agency (SSA) are continuing while security measures at all entrance or access points to Parliament have been heightened for the safety and security of all other members of the Parliamentary Community, service providers and the public accessing or entering the Parliamentary precinct. Parliament appeals to all people affected by these heightened measures to be patient and cooperate with the South African Police Service as efforts are undertaken to ensure that they are reasonable and less intrusive through, among others, use of well functioning security technology. Parliament has also noted with concern the speculative and harmful conclusions on the alleged factors behind the death, which are still under investigation. Parliament wishes to appeal to all and sundry to give the investigations appropriate space and avoid perpetrating actions and utterances that could further retard the healing of the family and compromise the investigations into this tragedy. The Parliamentary community wishes to express its condolences to the family of Mr Garane, work-colleagues and friends during this dark hour of prematurely losing their loved one. May his soul rest in peace. Issued by Moloto Mothapo, Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, 17 September 2018