OUTCOMES OF PRODUCTIVE ENGAGEMENTS BETWEEN THE ANC AND AGRI SA 7 September 2018 The ANC and Agri SA had a productive and fruitful discussion on various issues pertaining to the agricultural sector. More than 200 members, which included farmer representatives from Agri SA’s provincial, commodity and corporate chambers were present. Members had the opportunity to voice their concerns regarding the agricultural sector to the leadership of the ANC. “This engagement with the ANC is of immeasurable value, we are optimistic about the future of a sustainable agricultural sector in South Africa,” said Dan Kriek, Agri SA President. “I feel that the ANC heard our concerns and will take it into consideration for the path ahead.” Members had the opportunity to voice their concerns regarding land expropriation without compensation. Agri SA remains against any amendment to Section 25 of the Constitution. Agri SA believes that Section 25 as it currently stands does provide the state with the necessary legislative powers to ensure that land reform takes place in an orderly way and according to prescribed processes. “We all have to work together now to ensure food security for all South Africans,” said Kriek. Agri SA will continue to advocate for South Africa’s farmers and the farming communities. The ANC is encouraged by the spirit of cooperation from the farming community, we believe only through dialogue can sustainable solutions to the most difficult questions be found. The ANC is particularly interested in creating an inclusive economy, with land being a key part of the economy. The Land Bank has been operating very successfully and the ANC wishes to see all loans being successfully repaid, as such the banking sector is very important in the process. The question of property rights is central to this. This right is not under threat. ANC position on land expropriation without compensation is for specific circumstances in the land reform process. This is aimed at supporting open commerce and certainty. The ANC Head of Elections, Cde Fikile Mbalula, remarked in closing what summed up the continued engagement with Agri SA “We love you for being patriots and remaining non-partisan.” Pule Mabe National Spokesperson African National Congress Dan KriekAgri SA President Statement issued by ANC and Agri SA, 7 September 2018