DA lays criminal charges against ANC officials over alleged Bosasa kickbacks Note to Editors: Please find attached a soundbite in English by the Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance, John Steenhuisen MP. Today, DA Chief Whip, John Steenhuisen MP, laid criminal charges against ANC MP, Vincent Smith; Minister of Mineral Resources, Gwede Mantashe; Minister of Communications, Nomvula Mokonyane; former SAA Chairperson, Dudu Myeni; Deputy Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Thabang Makwetla; and others in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act (Act 12 of 2004). Also implicated are former procurement manager of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa, Mbulelo Gingcana, and former Head of Correctional Services, Linda Mti. This follows reports that they received security upgrades and other benefits from Bosasa, also known as African Global Operations, the controversial facilities management that has secured contracts worth R10 billion from various government departments. These allegedly included: An alarm system, electric fencing and CCTV worth R250 000 for Myeni’s house in Richards Bay; Recording systems, perimeter lighting and CCTV worth R300 000 at Mantashe’s Boksburg, Cala and Elliott houses; An alarm system, CCTV system and electric fence valued at R350 000 for Makwetla’s house; and A CCTV system and electric fencing valued at R200 000 for Smith’s house in Roodepoort. Smith also allegedly received over R671 000 over the past three years and R100 000 in cash from Bosasa CEO Gavin Watson on a monthly basis. Bosasa has throughout the years benefitted from being awarded several large contracts by various government departments and entities, reportedly worth more than R10 billion over the next five to ten years. These include the departments of Justice and Correctional Services and the Airports Company of South Africa. Given the intersection of Bosasa securing large government contracts, and Bosasa’s provision of various and generous benefits to Smith, Mokonyane, Mantashe, Myeni and the others, all of whom were at one stage or another in a position to potentially help secure some of these contracts for Bosasa, we believe that an investigation into the stated allegations may reveal that criminal offences were indeed committed in terms of sections 3 and 4 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act. The DA stands firmly against corruption and will always ensure that those who violate their oath of office are held accountable. These serious allegations must be investigated without haste, so the public knows who paid for the upgrades. The failing ANC has allowed corruption to flourish and compromise its governance of the country, and South Africans can put an end to this by voting DA in 2019. Statement issued by John Steenhuisen MP, Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance, 14 September 2018