DA rejects women and only men are in key position candidates 19 September 2018 Only men are nominated by the DA for the two top positions in the DA-run governments of the Western Cape and Cape Town, says the ANC Western Cape. The ANC is also not surprised that Alan Winde is now going to head the DA’s election campaign for 2019 as it was clear that the Liberal back room boys cabal has won the shenanigans to keep control of its faction in the provincial government. Winde will replace the incumbent Helen Zille and Dan Plato will take over from Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille who has been pushed to early retirement. ANC Western Cape leader of the opposition Khaya Magaxa says: “DA provincial leader Bonginkozi Madikizela and his faction were manoeuvred out of the way for Winde to walk the process. The DA’s choice of Winde is obviously a motion of no confidence in Madikizela as the party shows it has not confidence in him to be able to govern. Madikizela in the eyes of its leaders is not good enough for the governance job, as a black man he is only good enough to bring votes to the DA. He must immediately resign. “On closer scrutiny, Winde as MEC for agriculture could for the past two years not get a clean audit and in fact still did not submit his department’s annual report for 2016/17! He is evidently weak in governance. It is also a very bad message to Western Cape people where the majority are of coloured origin; but no person of colour is good enough to be the premier of this province – the only one where the DA is in control. “The ANC notes that the Liberal faction in the DA has also blocked its national leader Mmusi Mainane to become the Western Cape premier. Maimane knew the leadership pool in the Western Cape is found wanting and therefore he nominated himself as premier candidate – but he had to withdraw under pressure. “It is also noted Maimane claimed to have been ‘asked’ to become the premier when he anointed himself for the position as at national level he was going nowhere. He falls around as he backflips and flip-flops to explain his turnabout. He is clearly a kept puppet. The voters of the province must deal decisively with this turncoat DA and its leaders.” Issued by Khaya Magaxa on behalf of ANC Western Cape, 19 September 2018