House of Brave resigns Ocean Basket by Herman Manson. The seafood restaurant was a founding client of the ad agency. Consultancy is marketing dept, agency rolled into oneby Herman Manson. SME-and-startup-focused marketing consultancy, Watson Ferguson, was launched two years ago by Andrew Watson and Dylan Ferguson. Elouise Kelly swaps SABC for Ogilvy Johannesburgby MarkLives. Elouise Kelly has been appointed MD of Ogilvy & Mather Johannesburg and Tracey Edwards has been promoted to chief delivery officer of Ogilvy SA. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Mbuso Ndlovuby Veli Ngubane. Someone who’s led creative at a Vietnam agency, clocked up international awards and even sung solo for the pope, Mbuso Ndlovu has strong opinions. Front page tributes to Winnie Madikizela-Mandelaby MarkLives. Newspaper front pages pay tribute to the life of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who passed away on Monday, 2 April 2018 after a long illness. Regular Reads: - Cover Stories: Thoughtfulness in design — 6 Apr 2018 and 29 Mar 2018 - Shelf Life: Joe Public goes 2.0 for Chicken Licken and Black River creates a Darling campaign for Wonga- SA TV Ratings for Feb 2018: SABC 3 and e.tv On the Campaign Radar: - ‘Missing’ Herald merges online/offline- New fashion film by The Brave Cartel On the Radar: - Creative Circle: Jan, Feb 2018 monthly winners- Mann Made rolls out new CI- Renault appoints ad agency- New 702 afternoon drive host announced- New sales agency for Ilanga- Station of the Year finalists for Liberty Radio Awards- First-ever Ciclope Africa finalists announced Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or MarkLives Zambia! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.