COSATU reaffirms commitment to BDS against Israel - disappointed by betrayal and selfishness of DJ Black Coffee 4 April 2018 COSATU wishes to reaffirm its commitment to the cause of the Palestinian people and their struggle against apartheid, colonial occupation and racism. We regard this as a struggle for our own dignity as workers and South Africans, who suffered the dehumanisation and waged a relentless struggle, with the undying support of the international community. It is therefore, inconceivable, for a South African, particularly a black South African and direct beneficiary of untold amounts of solidarity, who knows and has experienced what racism, apartheid and brutal suffering means, to openly and continuously, allow himself to be used by a regime that is the prime force for global racism, colonial occupation and racist dehumanisation of others, in return for  a few pennies. It is true that, even as some may believe Israeli racism is not targeted at them personally, but the racists, equally don’t recognise your own humanity too and therefore, you are part of the sub human flock they seek to subjugate permanently. We salute all the artists and dignified human beings, who stand firm everyday resisting racist bribery, as they unequivocally affirm the sanctity of justice and freedom for all as an  affirmation of  their own humanity. In particular, we are inspired by the global wave of actors, musicians, cultural activists from all over Africa, Europe, the US, Latin America and Asia who daily resist the lucrative temptations offered by Zionist Companies and their greedy Patrons to lure them to Israel. Artists as workers are the frontline defenders of human dignity, as we recognise the role our own played in the struggle against apartheid, such as Bra Hugh Masekela and the legendary Mirriam Makeba, together with many others. In the same vein, many artists from all over the world refused to play in South Africa as an expression of their own solidarity with the suffering people of South Africa and the dignity of being human. They resisted lucrative offers and chose justice and dignity for all. It would not be too much to do just that, if not as a principle, as a return of the favour and inspiration to those who need us most at this hour of need, the women and children of Palestine and those still suffering from colonialism, together with all who suffer racism in our own country and globally. Finally, we reiterate the words of a revolutionary legend, former President of Mozambique, Samora Moises Machel, when he said,  “International solidarity is not an act of charity: it is an act of unity between allies fighting on different terrains toward the same objectives. The foremost of these objectives is to assist in the development of humanity to the highest level possible.” Issued by Sizwe Pamla, National Spokesperson, COSATU, 4 April 2018