COSATU remembers Cde Chris Hani’s unwavering commitment to rolling back the tyranny of the market 10 April 2018 The Congress of South African Trade Unions remembers the revolutionary stalwart Cde Chris Thembisile Hani, who was murdered twenty five years ago by rightwing lunatics. This treacherous and treasonous act was meant to stabilise the country and unleash a civil war that was going to result in rivers of blood. We remember this revolutionary as a disciplined leader of immense integrity and his unwavering dedication to the cause of the working class. He is a president we never had and it is still a travesty that he never saw the dawn of democracy that he spent his entire life fighting for. We greatly miss his immense contribution and insightful Marxist critiques of both capitalist and socialist societies and their theories. He frowned upon intransigent dogmatism and would definitely have frowned upon the current inconsistent pragmatism that has seen our government returning boldly to apartheid capitalism. Cde Chris Hani was clear on what he stood for and he summed up his position, when he said “Socialism is not about big concepts and heavy theory. Socialism is about decent shelter for those who are homeless. It is about water for those who have no safe drinking water. It is about health care, it is about a life of dignity for the old. It is about overcoming the huge divide between urban and rural areas. It is about a decent education for all our people. Socialism is about rolling back the tyranny of the market. As long as the economy is dominated by an unelected, privileged few, the case for socialism will exist”. We shall continue to honour Cde Chris Hani’s legacy by continuing to fight for the previously oppressed majority to be affirmed and included in the mainstream economy. Our commitment to pushing back and rolling back the tyranny of the market is unwavering and we remain inspired by his selflessness and dedication. Issued by Sizwe Pamla, National Spokesperson, COSATU, 10 April 2018