Sisulu blind to farm murders; farmer in the Free State attacked 3 April 2018 The ANC’s approach of turning a blind eye to the wave of farm attacks that have taken place since President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement concerning land expropriated without compensation, makes it extremely unsafe on farms and reinforces the international community’s perception that South African farmers are being persecuted. While the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, Lindiwe Sisulu, gets upset about the fact that the international community is starting to consider farm attacks as large-scale persecution of farmers in South Africa, her government is doing absolutely nothing to ensure the safety of farmers. During the same long weekend that she tried to keep the diplomatic peace between South Africa and Australia, Chris du Plooy (80) was tied up on his farm in the Paul Roux district and stabbed with a knife several times on Monday morning. A .38 revolver and a shotgun were stolen during the attack and the two attackers are still at large. Sisulu can no longer hide the truth from the rest of the world because the international community has taken note of farm murders. Sisulu’s own government is responsible for the growing perception internationally that farmers in South Africa are being persecuted and murdered in the cruellest of ways. Sisulu’s own government is also reinforcing the perception locally that the farmers stole the land. It is also Sisulu’s ANC who wants to speed up land expropriation without compensation in South Africa, but who cannot say how they will keep the process from resulting in violence, as is currently the case. Sisulu’s own government has the blood of every murdered farmer on its hands and the pressure on her to answer international questions in this regard will only increase. The FF Plus will also keep the pressure on the government to declare farm murders a priority crime and the party will make sure that the international community is informed of how extremely unsafe it is on farms in South Africa due to the ANC. Issued by Jan van Niekerk, FF Plus provincial leader: Free State, 3 April 2018