PRESS RELEASE BY THE FOUNDATION FOR EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW The recent, so-called revelations by Paul Erasmus have, once again, raised the question whether the Truth and Reconciliation process was an exercise in futility. The concluding paragraph of the Interim Constitution, which forms the basis for the current Constitution, reads as follows: The adoption of this Constitution lays the secure foundation for the people of South Africa to transcend the divisions and strife of the past, which generated gross violations of human rights, the transgression of humanitarian principles in violent conflicts and a legacy of hatred, fear guilt and revenge. All parties and persons involved in the conflict of the past had the opportunity to submit full details to the various committees of the TRC in respect of all unlawful acts committed during the conflict. In 1999, Jerry Richardson applied for amnesty for the murders of Stompie Sepei, Lolo Sono and Quqi Zwane, committed during 1988. He was a member of the Mandela United Football Club, controlled by Winnie Mandela. He stated during his application that Winnie Mandela had commissioned Stompie Sepei's murder. However, no corroborating evidence could be found that Winnie Mandela was involved in the murder. She was however held to be guilty of the abduction and assault of Stompie Sepei. During the amnesty hearing, extensive evidence was heard about the abduction and murder of Stompie Seipei and the other two persons. Paul Erasmus claims that all the members of the Mandela Football Club were informants of the Security Branch. Any member of an intelligence community, whether local or international, who is familiar with the recruitment and management of informants, is aware that the recruiting and handling of an informant is a laborious and time-consuming process. In the case of Winnie Mandela, there was only one member of the Security Branch in Soweto who gave her full-time attention. It would have been impossible for such a member to recruit and handle all the members of the soccer club. In addition, any black person who collaborated with the Security Branch during the eighties was at risk of him- or herself and their families being killed by the necklacing method. It was extremely difficult for the Security Branch to recruit any informant who was able to report on Winnie Mandela's activities. The identity of an informant was protected at all costs and only the member who handled such an informant was aware of such a person’s true identity. In fact, such an informant's life was at stake. The so-called revelations by Paul Erasmus more than 30 years after the murders took place and 20 years after the amnesty hearings were held, raises the following questions: (a) Why did he not reveal his information during the amnesty hearings of Jerry Richardson when these matters were of vital importance? He could even have obtained legal assistance and protection had he wanted it. (b) How did he come to know that the members of the soccer club were all police informers? He was never attached to or involved with the Soweto Security Branch. (c) Why does he not provide the usual details in respect of each case regarding the date, place and names of persons involved as would be expected in the interest of the truth? The only way in which the truth can be determined after so many years is by means of a polygraph test. Some of the former members of the Security Branch who were involved, have already died and they cannot therefore state their case. The Foundation for Equality Before the Law wants to ask Paul Erasmus whether, in the interest of truth, he is willing to submit himself to a polygraph test on the following questions: (a) That all the revelations he has made are, to the best of his knowledge, the whole truth; (b) Whether, where he committed unlawful acts, these were done with the full approval and knowledge of higher authority; and (c) That he has no hidden agenda so far as these revelations are concerned. The Foundation trusts that these members of the Media for whom the truth is more important than sensation, will help that the truth prevails. Statement issued by JP Botha, Chairperson of the Foundation for Equality Before the Law, 12 April 2018