Supra’s appointed task team into Health Department only a smokescreen to avoid accountability 10 April 2018 The Democratic Alliance has written to the Public Protector, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, requesting her to launch an investigation into the scandals surrounding the Department of Health. This comes after Premier Supra Mahumapelo’s decision to appoint three members of his Executive to intervene at the Department of Health and Social Development and the ongoing strike action by Nehawu. See letter here. Nehawu has been on strike since 26 February 2018, and as part of their demands they are calling for the dismissal of the Head of the Health Department, Dr Thabo Lekalakala, and termination of contracted companies by the department which includes the Gupta-linked Mediosa company. The Premier has chosen to appoint the MEC for Sports and Education, Sello Lehari, MEC for Health, Dr. Magome Masike and the MEC for Social Development, Hoffman Galeng to probe and intervene at the departments. By appointing MEC Masike and MEC Galeng, Premier Mahumapelo is essentially asking them to investigate themselves and this could result in a cover-up of any irregularities pertaining to the investigations. This so-called task team will not be accountable to anyone, as the Premier himself has been implicated in the scandals involving the Department of Health. It is completely unacceptable that Premier Mahumapelo has set himself as the judge and executioner for this investigation whilst there are allegations that he himself was involved in these irregularities. It is also under the leadership of MEC Masike that the Department of Health has continued to deteriorate and to be marred by maladministration whilst failing to deliver health services to the people of North West. We cannot expect the same MECs who were part of creating the crisis that is faced by this province to also offer lasting solutions. The ANC continues to show that they are only out to protect their own interests and lack any kind of accountability, the people of North West need Total Change through a government that will prioritize proper governance, accountability and service delivery. Issued by Tutu Faleni, Democratic Alliance Spokesperson on Health, 10 April 2018