ANC KZN faction are a threat to the province’s stability 12 April 2018 Recent media reports confirming the ‘indefinite’ postponement of the ANC’s regional conferences in KwaZulu-Natal are yet another example of cracks within the party. According to the reports, all of the conferences have been halted “until further notice”. The move comes just days after chaotic scenes earlier this week in the Howick area, where an ANC meeting was taking place, which saw bodyguards, allegedly belonging to KZN Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane, fire shots to prevent certain members from attending the meeting. The members are believed to form part of the so-called ‘Zuma faction’ within the province. The DA is deeply concerned by this incident. The ANC KZN Interim Coordinator, Sihle Zikalala, can no longer deny the existence of factionalism within the ANC in this province, with some party members, including himself, still holding on to the Zuma regime and others supporting the new ANC leadership. Of particular concern are the earlier media reports which confirm that some members of the ANC fear bloodshed. This unfortunate situation is not just internal ANC fighting but it is a problem that, if not dealt with by the ANC, will destabilize our province, affect service delivery and even undermine economic progress and the creation of jobs. The DA remains the only party in KwaZulu Natal that has a functioning and democratically-elected provincial leadership. It is clear that the ANC is failing dismally to resolve its internal problems and cannot be trusted to lead this provincial government. The DA calls on the people of KZN to denounce the ANC and its government and to hold them accountable for ongoing non-performance and slow progress when it comes to development in our province. They deserve better, they deserve a government that is not power hungry and which does not put its own needs ahead of the people it is meant to serve. The people of KZN deserve a total change. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango, DA KZN Leader, 12 April 2018