Deputy Chairperson of FedCo was elected not appointed The Democratic Alliance (DA) wishes to dismiss a Sunday Times report that states that Natasha Mazzone was appointed as one of two Deputy Chairpersons of Federal Council (FedCo). Ms Mazzone was elected by the Federal Congress, the Party’s highest decision-making body. Confusion around this matter may arise from only one Deputy Chairperson being announced by the Federal Congress. The facts are as follows: During the Federal Congress which took place on 7 & 8 April 2018 Congress resolved to amend section 6.2.4.1 of the Federal Constitution to the effect that two members would serve as Deputy Chairpersons of the FedCo. In terms of another section of the Federal Constitution these office bears must be elected during the Federal Congress. FedCo on 6 April 2018 resolved that voting in this election would take place on Sunday 8 April 2018, subject to the approval by Congress of the creation of two Deputy Chairpersons. This meant that two Deputy Chairpersons of FedCo would be elected if Congress adopted that amendment to the Federal Constitution. In order to seek clarity, the matter was taken to the Federal Legal Commission (FLC), a party structure of the Party with the power and authority to inter alia interpret the Federal Constitution, and decide on the legality or otherwise of any meeting, action, election or resolution by any Party structure. FLC resolved that "the position of a second Deputy Chairperson of the Federal Council is to be filled by way of the result of the vote that took place on 8 April 2018 during Federal Congress." It is important to note that the purported decision to task FedCo with the election of a second Deputy Chairperson at its next meeting was at no stage framed as an enabling amendment of section 6.2.4.1 in as far as it determines that the Deputy Chairperson “must” be elected during the meeting of Congress. Statement issued by James Selfe MP, DA Federal Council Chairperson, 15 April 2018 Previous DA statement on this matter: Natasha Mazzone elected Deputy Chair of Federal Council During the Democratic Alliance (DA) Federal Congress which took place on 7 & 8 April 2018 Congress resolved to amend section 6.2.4.1 of the Federal Constitution to the effect that two members would serve as deputy chairs of the Federal Council (FedCo). In terms of another section of the Federal Constitution these office bears must be elected during the Federal Congress. FedCo on 6 April 2018 resolved that voting in this election would take place on Sunday 8 April 2018, subject to the approval by Congress of the creation of two Deputy Chairpersons. This meant that two Deputy Chairpersons of FedCo would be elected if Congress adopted that amendment to the Federal Constitution. In order to seek clarity, the matter was taken to the Federal Legal Commission (FLC), which resolved that "the position of a second Deputy Chairperson of the Federal Council is to be filled by way of the result of the vote that took place on 8 April 2018 during Federal Congress." Therefore, I wish to congratulate Ms Natasha Mazzone MP on her election as a Deputy Chairperson of Federal Council. Ms Mazzone brings with her a wealth of experience that will add deeply to the work of the 155-member FedCo, the Party’s highest decision-making body between Congresses. Ms Mazzone first started serving in the Party’s leadership structures over twenty years ago, when she was elected Chairperson of the then Democratic Party’s (DP’s) University of Pretoria Youth Branch in 1997. In May 2009, she was elected as a Member of Parliament. She’s been serving as the DA’s Shadow Minister of Public Enterprises since February 2012, a role in which she has been at the forefront of the fight against State Capture, exercising her duties with exemplary courage. Statement issued by Anchen Dreyer, DA Federal Congress Chief Electoral Officer, 12 April 2018