'Winnie didn't kill Stompie Seipei' – Vytjie Mentor Former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor told the congregation at St George's Cathedral in Cape Town on Thursday that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was not responsible for Stompie Seipei's death. Mentor's declaration comes after people took to social media soon after her death at the age of 81 on Monday to accuse Madikizela-Mandela of murdering the 14-year-old boy in 1989. Madikizela-Mandela was an anti-apartheid activist, often referred to as "Mother of the Nation". "Not the court of law, not the TRC could link Winnie to the orchestration of Stompie's execution," said Mentor. "It is a lie and a fabrication by the National Party." Mentor said she was disgusted by the negative comments made about Madikizela-Mandela. 'Hung out to dry' Mentor recalled an interview Madikizela-Mandela gave 20 years ago on land expropriation. "She was a futurist, because she dealt with these issues years ago. She spoke about land and means of production. "She said land must be redistributed and expropriated. But this doesn't mean whites should be driven into the sea. She was later hung out to dry by her colleagues," said Mentor. Mentor further explained the reasons why Madikizela-Mandela's colleagues may have been threatened by her. "She was a symbol of hope and defiance and maybe she became too big. As you know, it is undesirable for an individual to grow bigger than the party," she said. She spoke about the erection of a monument in Madikizela-Mandela's honour. "We don't want a monument of stone and bricks, but one that bridges the gap between the rich and the poor," said Mentor. News24 *** Trevor Manuel blasts Ace Magashule during Madikizela-Mandela memorial service Former finance minister Trevor Manuel had some choice words for former Free State premier Ace Magashule at a memorial service at St George's Cathedral in Cape Town on Thursday for his failure to convert Winnie Madikizela-Mandela's Brandfort home into a museum as planned. The struggle stalwart passed away at the age of 81 on Monday and has been hailed as a fierce opponent of the apartheid government. She was banished to Brandfort, in the Free State, in 1977 where she spent 10 years of her life excluded from society and in a home without basic amenities. "The restoration of the house in Brandfort was budgeted for years ago. [Ace] Magashule has taken 11 years to fulfil his commitment," said Manuel.Manuel also referred to corruption allegations against Magashule relating to the misappropriation of R130m in the Estina dairy farm project."He speaks about the money as if it has disappeared," exclaimed Manuel to thunderous applause. Discussions 'since 2007' "This is not a place of pain. This should be a place that you take your children and civil servants to remind them of Mandela's words: 'Never, never, never again.'" Earlier this week, Magashule visited Madikizela-Mandela's home in Soweto, Johannesburg. Speaking to journalists outside the house after his visit, Magashule denied any wrongdoing. He said the museum would be built and that the money allocated for the purpose not gone missing. "We have been in discussion with the family here. So we can't discuss what government and the family has been discussing since 2007," said Magashule. "The family clearly knows and we know there hasn't been money that's been lost anywhere. That museum in Brandfort will definitely happen." News24