6 arrested as protests cause chaos in Cape Town, Overberg 25 April 2018 Several roads in Cape Town and the Overberg have been closed after protesters blockaded them with burning tyres and threw stones and bricks at cars on Wednesday morning, officials said. In Pelican Park six people were arrested for public violence, said Western Cape police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Andrè Traut. This was after about 200 protesters "attempted to disrupt the traffic and peace". Residents in the area reported being stuck in their homes because of the blocked roads and tear gas being used to disperse the group. Pelican Park Primary School was not officially closed on Wednesday morning, however, only 10 pupils showed up for school, said Jessica Shelver, spokesperson for Western Cape education MEC Debbie Schäfer. Their parents took them home. Shelver said the protest action also had an effect on Pelican Park High School. "The schools will ensure that catch-up programmes are instituted for any work that was lost due to the strike action today." Housing issues Cape Town traffic services spokesperson Richard Coleman said Strandfontein Road was closed between 5th Avenue and Spine Road. Olieboom Road was also closed. Traut said officers would remain in the area "until tranquility has been restored". It is understood the protest is related to housing issues. In nearby Phumlani, officials were monitoring a peaceful protest, said the City's law enforcement spokesperson Wayne Dyason. Police were also monitoring protests on Sir Lowry's Pass, Grabouw, on Wednesday morning, said Traut. According to Coleman, the N2 was closed in both directions between Sir Lowry's Pass Road and Grabouw. Western Cape traffic chief Kenny Africa said the N2 was closed between Botrivier and Gordon's Bay. The R321 Villiersdorp Road at Elgin was also closed briefly but re-opened just before 11:00. Africa said protesters were throwing stones and burning tyres on the roads. It was not immediately clear what the reason was for this protest. Motorists were advised to use alternative routes. News24