UCT to honour struggle icon Chris Hani on 25th anniversary of assassination 9 April 2018 In recognition of the late anti-apartheid veteran, Chris Hani, the University of Cape Town (UCT) will celebrate the life and legacy of the inspirational leader, by renaming the New Science Lecture Theatre to the Chris Hani Lecture Theatre. This is to honour the late icon’s contribution to South Africa’s democracy. Tuesday, 10 April 2018, marks the 25th anniversary of Hani’s assassination. The official renaming ceremony, to be held on the 25 April 2018, will be attended by the Hani family and Deputy Minister of Public Works and Deputy Secretary-General of the South African Communist Party (SACP) Jeremy Cronin who will give the keynote address. The vice-chancellor of UCT Dr Max Price, UCT Chair of the Naming of Buildings Committee (NoBC) Advocate Norman Arendse SC and other dignitaries will also be present. The renaming of buildings is just one part of a multifaceted transformation project committed to overcoming the legacy of apartheid and colonialism in the university system - and to make UCT a home to all. The institution regards the naming of buildings as a historic moment.  It is a change that will not just linger in the name boards on the side of buildings but should be a definitive break with South Africa’s painful past. The renaming project aims to create a more inclusive and representative institution. However, the most difficult aspect to address in this process is institutional culture. Renaming buildings is central to this redress. It is symbolic of a transformation not only on the UCT campus, but more importantly of our attitudes and values. UCT recognises that there is still a long way to go with the process of transformation, but one thing that is certain is that, the renaming of each building symbolises an important milestone on our journey as a university. Issued by Nombuso Shabalala, Head: Media Liaison, Communication and Marketing Department, University of Cape Town, 9 April 2018