Agency takes SA to global EC market • Buckland exits Creative Spark • Indy Newspapers = ‘disgusting’ • PRISM winners Agency takes SA products to global EC market by Herman Manson. The incredible uptake of ecommerce means we need to find new, relevant ways of developing brands — as Michael van den Heerik is doing through Web Wiser. Buckland exits Creative Spark, M&C Saatchi Group by Herman Manson. Matthew Buckland has exited Creative Spark, the digital agency he launched, and taken its news and media division, Burn Media, with him. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Thithi Nteta by Veli Ngubane. Thithi Nteta sits on exco at FCB Joburg. Read more about her views on the global challenge around gender diversity and her approach to leadership. ‘Disgusting’ sums up Indy Newspapers by Herman Manson. Nobody really thought this month could get any worse for the South African media industry. But Independent Newspapers upped the ante on Friday, 20 April 2018, and SANEF went on the warpath. Decoding the Business Day Lamberti editorial (we tried) by Herman Manson. On Thursday, 19 April 2018, the latest to cause outrage was Business Day, which had just run an editorial headlined "EDITORIAL: Don’t fire the messenger." South African media tarnishing own reputation by Herman Manson. We collate some public reaction on the retractions, misogyny and what appears to be personal vendettas. It's been a shameful couple of weeks. Regular Reads: Cover Stories: Contemporary And, Pattern Brutal, Slash, The Guardian Review & Volkskrant magazine Shelf Life: King Price TVC captures consumers with comedy; Burger King’s Whopper guide dog; & Ballo expands into apparel SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Mar 2018 On the Radar: - PRISM Awards 2018 winners - New leadership for IAB SA - First Publisher Audience Measurement Survey (PAMS) covers titles, brands - Most media freelancers earn less than R10k Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.