Make sure of details of application procedure, urges FEDSAS of applications for Gauteng schools Applications for 2019 for Grade 1 and Grade 8 in schools in Gauteng open on Monday (16 April 2018) and may only be done online. It is therefore important that parents apply as soon as possible and that they understand the online platform. An application is only valid once all the required documents have been handed in at all schools indicated on the application. This has to happen within seven days of the online application. Applications close on 28 May 2018. “A serious flaw with the online application platform is that the Department deliberately did not provide for the selection of a language of education. This is educationally irresponsible and will create expectations that cannot be met. Gauteng has a big shortage of schools. Parents who wait too long before applying must be aware what their children will probably not be able to attend their first-choice school,” says Dr Jaco Deacon, Deputy CEO of the Federation of Governing Bodies of South African Schools (FEDSAS). Deacon says the registration process is putting the cart before the horse and parents are therefore advised to apply early and to follow the correct procedure. “It is critically important to hand in the necessary documents at all the schools listed on the application otherwise the application will be invalid.” The Gauteng Education Department has indicated that the online platform has been adapted since last year to simplify the process. The web address for online applications is www.gdeadmissions.gov.za. Parents who want to “practise” first can visit www.intake.gdeadmissions.gov.za Deacon says parents can apply for a maximum of five schools. “Placement is done at the hand of the time of the application. The earlier you apply, the better your chances of getting a place at your school of choice.” “The lack of schools and the nature of the management of education in Gauteng cause problems every year. FEDSAS’ message is simple and clear: If you want to enrol your child in a good school do so immediately!” FEDSAS has created a special link on the organisation’s website with guidelines and a video for parents as well as a quick link to the registration platform. Visit www.fedsas.org.za * Attached is a ten-point plan to assist parents with the application procedure. Admissions 2019 1. Application for admission to a public school for Grade 1 and Grade 8 may ONLY be done on the online platform of the Gauteng Education Department: visit www.gdeadmissions.gov.za or www.intake.gdeadmissions.gov.za. The second address can be used to familiarise yourself with the process. 2. The platform makes provision for choosing up to a maximum of five schools. 3. The language of education and the mother tongue of a learner are not determining factors in the application procedure. Mother tongue is only listed for statistical reasons. HOWEVER PARENTS HAVE A LEGAL RIGHT TO CHOOSE THE LANGUAGE OF EDUCATION OF THEIR CHILDREN. 4. The application process gives preference to early applications and placement is done according to the time of application. 5. As a result of pressure on the capacity at some schools it is advisable to apply at more than one school in order to make a choice at a later stage. 6. There is a quick link on the FEDSAS web page (www.fedsas.org.za) to the registration page, as well as a short video that explains the process. What parents should know: 1. Applications open on Monday, 16 April 2018, at 08:00. 2. Apply as soon as possible. 3. After a first choice based on residential or work address or siblings has been made, parents have the right to choose a specific school. If parents live or work in the school’s feeding area or have other children at a school, it will be an A-list application, otherwise it is considered a B-list application. 4. Parents should make a note of their user name and password. 5. Parents will receive an SMS to confirm that their application was received. 6. Parents should keep a record of the waiting list number on the confirmation screen. It is advisable to take a screen shot or a photo. 7. Applications are only valid once all required documents have been handed in at all the schools listed on the application. This must happen within seven days of the online application. 8. Applications close on 28 May 2018 but parents should apply as close as possible to 16 April. 9. Shortly after 28 May 2018 parents will receive an SMS to indicate all the schools where the learner may enrol. 10. Parents then visit the online platform again to accept the offer of placement at one of the schools where their application was successful. THE APPLICATION PROCESS INVOLVES TWO ACTIONS AND IT IS IMPORTANT THAT PARENTS EXECUTE BOTH STEPS: 1. APPLY ONLINE 2. HAND IN THE REQUIRED DOCUMENTS AT ALL THE SCHOOLS LISTED ON THE APPLICATIN WITHIN SEVEN DAYS ENDS Issued by Dr Jaco Deacon, Deputy CEO: FEDSAS, 13 April 2018