Sports Minister Xasa 'appalled' by Moses Mabhida stadium chaos Minister of Sport and Recreation Tokozile Xasa has strongly condemned the violent scenes seen at Moses Mabhida Stadium on Saturday following a Nedbank Cup semi-final tie. Chaos erupted at the venue in Durban after angry fans invaded the pitch following Kaizer Chiefs' 2-0 loss to Free State Stars, dumping Chiefs out of the cup. Fans could be seen storming the field, hurling chairs and beating security officials. One female security guard was injured as a result of the scuffle with fans. Police had to use teargas and stun grenades to disperse unruly fans. Minister Xasa said the Premier Soccer League and stadium management must provide answers on what happened at Moses Mabhida Stadium. "We can’t wait for another person to die before we act. How did supporters manage to storm the ground and endanger people's lives? Football is a beautiful game and I can't idle while few supporters are making a skunk of our game," Xasa said on Sunday. The continued incidents made a mockery of the SASREA ACT when it came to security. "While still looking into reinstating the committee of enquiry into the FNB stampede, then this happens. This validates my view that an investigation must happen, so that we fully understand areas of weakness in sport security." Violence could never be a solution no matter how frustrated fans might feel, Xasa continued. "We must make football a family sport. Supporters must always know, you win some and you lose some. After all sport is about win or lose." Stadium Management South Africa on Sunday registered its "grave concern" over the gruesome assault of the female security guard. Due process must be followed to get to the bottom of it. Kaizer Chiefs coach Steve Kompela meanwhile resigned as a result of the incident. News24 Two arrested, 'more imminent' after Moses Mabhida stadium violence Two people have been arrested after violence broke out at the Moses Mabhida Stadium over the weekend during a Nedbank Cup semi-final tie. Two men, aged 27 and 33, will appear in the Durban Magistrate's Court on Monday on charges of public violence and malicious damage to property, said Captain Nqobile Gwala. She said more arrests were imminent. On Saturday night, chaos erupted at the venue after angry fans invaded the pitch following Kaizer Chiefs' 2-0 loss to Free State Stars, dumping Chiefs out of the cup. Fans could be seen storming the field, hurling chairs and beating security officials. One security guard was injured as a result of the scuffle with fans. Police had to use teargas and stun grenades to disperse unruly fans. Footage shows a female security guard being severely beaten by fans, leading to some on social media on Sunday speculating she may have died. Police however could not confirm any deaths at the time of publication. Marshall Security Sunday said the security official was not one of their employees. "The term 'field marshall' is used for officials controlling access control to the pitch and is not related to Marshall Security who are not the contracted security provider to Moses Mabhida Stadium," a statement read. "At this stage reports of a fatality are alleged however unconfirmed as no official media statement has been released by either MMS management or the South African Police Services. "We ask that the public respect the rights of the injured and allow for official confirmation before posting unconfirmed reports on social media." News24 Update: Beaten Moses Mabhida stadium guard 'seriously injured, but stable' A security guard who was beaten up during a violent breakout at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban is in stable condition, paramedics said on Sunday. "She is in hospital. She is seriously injured but stable," said Crisis Medical spokesperson Kyle Van Reenen. There were social media reports on Sunday that the guard had died as a result of her injuries sustained at the venue during the Nedbank Cup semi-final match. Van Reenen, however, dismissed those reports as incorrect. News24