Supra has lost control of the North West  18 April 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West again calls on Premier Supra Mahumapelo to resign as he has completely lost the trust of the people, and control of the Province. In a motion of no confidence in his leadership, the people of Mahikeng have taken to the streets calling for Supra to go. Protests in Mahikeng have been ignited by among other factors, the death of two patients outside the Monthshioa Clinic yesterday. The two deceased could allegedly not get medical help due to an ongoing strike by health workers. Medical staff were on a go-slow strike for weeks due to lack of resources and poor working conditions. All while tenders of millions were allocated to Gupta-linked companies. Two days ago, NEHAWU evacuated their members from health facilities in Mahikeng and surrounding areas. They have also sent patients, waiting in emergency rooms, home. The communities also conveyed their utter dismay with the R1 million bursary the Premier’s son allegedly received from Denel. These communities are voicing their anger against the lack of service delivery, the state of our province and the inadequate health care they are subjected to. Residents describe Mahikeng as “burning”. Busses have been torched, cars and tyres burned. Currently, roads are blocked. See pictures here, here and here. This could have been prevented if Mahumapelo played his role as custodian of the people of North West. His tenure as Premier has been marked by servicing his interests as well as those of the Guptas. A second protest started near Dithakong and is due to the lack of services. The state of roads, lack of infrastructure, unreliable water supply and general service delivery are some of the main reasons for the protest here. These service delivery protests are rapidly spreading to other areas. We respect peoples’ right to protest and can understand their anger and frustration. Too long have they been subjected to an uncaring Premier and ANC government. They battle without jobs, services, houses or support from the ANC. We, however, call on our people not to take the law into their own hands and to obey laws while protesting. As the DA we know it is time for Total Change. The people of North West deserve better. Under a DA-led government, we put our communities first, add value to their lives and follow through on our commitments. Dear Premier, please pack and leave while there is still something left of North West. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Leader, 18 April 2018