Ramaphosa fiddles while North West and Eastern Cape burn 25 April 2018 The Democratic Alliance once again appeals to ANC President, Cyril Ramaphosa, to listen to the people’s call for North West Premier, Supra Mahumapelo, and Eastern Cape, Phumulo Masualle to be removed. Residents of Keiskammahoek and Grahamstown in the Eastern Cape, and Mafikeng, Vryburg and Taung in the North West have taken to the streets to protest against poor service delivery, corruption and unemployment. These protests are on the back of resistance from Masualle and Mahumapelo to mounting calls by deeply concerned residents that they vacate office. The protests have resulted in violence, it is clear however that the frustration arises from a failure of leadership and governance at all levels. Ramaphosa’s failure to recall these Premiers is a clear demonstration of his protection of leaders who are indifferent to the plight of the people who they purport to serve. The fact is, a sell-by date on both Mahumapelo and Massualle has long since expired and they must vacate their offices with the little dignity they have left. If Ramaphosa is serious about the “New Dawn” he has promised our people, he will recall Mahumapelo and Massualle without further delay. President Ramaphosa must put the needs of the people above the internal politics of his party. If he fails to remove these Premiers his “New Dawn” would be nothing less than a PR stunt. All the new dawn has brought is chaos and disorder. These two Premiers have presided over poor health care and education systems and both have been at the centre of large-scale corruption. The Eastern Cape is South Africa's poorest province and its people are trapped in poverty. In the North West, there has been a complete shutdown of health care services and infrastructure development is non-existent. Our people deserve better and it is squarely in the hands of Cyril Ramaphosa to remove these problematic Premiers and get the North West and Eastern Cape back to working for its people. The DA is the only party that can bring Total Change and provide the people of South Africa with a prosperous future filled with opportunities for all, good governance and quality service delivery. Issued by Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA National Spokesperson, 25 April 2018