Major delays on N3 following protest near Mooi River toll plaza Angry protesters who barricaded the route heading towards the Mooi River toll plaza on Monday morning have now begun looting from burning delivery trucks stuck in traffic. Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI) spokesperson Zinhle Mngomezulu said: "There is a backlog of about 6 kilometres. Traffic has come to a complete standstill." "People are looting and burning trucks. We advise motorists to seek alternative routes," she said. Mngomezulu said that routes such as the R622 and R103, which are alternative routes, have also been affected by the protest action. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said the protesters were complaining that they were not being employed by the local truck owners. The N3 Toll Concession warned motorists about the protest action on its Twitter account and advised them to find alternative routes. News24  Update: Bheki Cele accompanies police management in KZN to Mooi River protest Police Minister Bheki Cele and senior management in KwaZulu-Natal have urgently travelled to Mooi River where protesters were causing havoc along the N3 highway on Monday morning. Motorists had been advised to seek alternative routes as the N3, R622 and R103 had been affected by protesters who were looting and allegedly setting trucks on fire near the Mooi River toll plaza. Cele’s spokesperson Nonkululeko Phokane said the minister and senior management had decided to attend to the situation after reports of looting and "chaos and disorder on the national road". "Police operations are already underway to manage the chaotic situation in Mooi River. The public order unit of the SAPS is already on site," Phokane said. Earlier, Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI) spokesperson Zinhle Mngomezulu said, "There is a backlog of about 6 kilometres. Traffic has come to a complete stand still." Mngomezulu said the N3 northbound had since been opened, with police attending to other routes. Provincial spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said people from a nearby informal settlement were upset about not being employed by local truck companies. The N3 Toll Concession confirmed on its Twitter account that the highway had been opened going north, but southbound still experienced "extensive backlogs". News24