Esidimeni: Manamela also wants to evade prosecution 18 January 2018 The resignation of Makgabo Manamela, suspended Gauteng director of Mental Health, which followed a mere twenty four hours after the resignation of the Head of the Department, Barney Selebano, proves that they are jumping off the sinking ship in an attempt to avoid further prosecution, says Philip van Staden, FF Plus MPL in the Gauteng Legislature. “The FF Plus has already made it very clear that Selebano will not be allowed to escape prosecution. Manamela must also be prepared to face further prosecution. The FF Plus will ensure that everyone that played a part in the Esidimeni tragedy will be duly prosecuted. “The Gauteng Premier, Mr David Makhura, still has to accept Manamela’s resignation and he most probably will as he has already accepted Selebano’s resignation. If the Premier accepts both resignations, it will confirm the FF Plus’s notion that the Premier simply wants to cover up the matter. It would also mean that the FF Plus will have no other choice but to have the Premier prosecuted as well. “Manamela was involved in the issuing of licenses to the illegal non-governmental organisations (NGO’s) that were to accommodate the psychiatric patients. Amongst others, she also issued a licence to Kalafong House. “The FF Plus had hoped that the Premier would refrain from accepting the resignations until after the arbitration hearings were concluded. The FF Plus is of the opinion that the accused are simply resigning in order to evade prosecution. It will, however, not be that easy. They will be prosecuted. “These two resignations, within the span of a mere twenty four hours, are also paving the way for the former MEC, Qedani Mahlangu, to not show up for questioning when the hearings resume later in January. The recent developments could mean that Mahlangu will simply never return from London and that she will therefore get off scot-free,” says Van Staden. Issued by Philip van Staden, FF Plus MPL: Gauteng Legislature, 18 January 2018