KPMG South Africa appoints Professor Wiseman Nkuhlu as Chairman and Ansie Ramalho as Independent Director KPMG South Africa today announces the appointment of Prof Wiseman Nkuhlu as Chairman of the Board and Ansie Ramalho as Independent Director on the Board, marking further progress in strengthening the governance and leadership of the firm. Both individuals will assume their roles, effective 1st March 2018. Prof Nkuhlu has over 30 years' experience working at the highest level in both the public and private sectors. He has served as a board director and as part of the audit committee at a wide range of leading public listed companies. He was the Chairman of New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), Chairman of the Development Bank of Southern Africa, President of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA), and Africa’s only representative of the Global Financial Crisis Advisory Panel established jointly by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) to advise on the accounting standards setting implications of the Global Financial Crisis. He is currently Chancellor of the University of Pretoria. Ramalho is an authority on corporate governance with both theoretical and applied knowledge of the topic. In addition to serving as professional non-executive director she consults, writes, teaches and presents on the various aspects of corporate law, directors’ duties and corporate governance. Ramalho was the appointed Institute of Directors in Southern Africa’s (IoDSA) King IV Project Lead with responsibility for the successful finalisation of the King IV Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa, 2016. Her prior position at the IoDSA was that of Chief Executive. Nhlamu Dlomu, CEO of KPMG South Africa, said: “I am delighted and humbled to announce these appointments. Prof Nkuhlu, as the first black Chartered Accountant in the country, has dedicated his life and his career to the role of the profession in supporting South Africa’s economic progress and transformation agenda. As an authority on corporate governance and the King IV Project Lead at IoDSA, Ramalho's expertise will also be invaluable to the Board. Prof Nkuhlu and Ramalho will add an external perspective and bring a huge amount of relevant experience, wisdom and challenge as we make the critical decisions required to rebuild the firm.” Commenting on his decision to join KPMG South Africa, Prof Nkuhlu said: “I am honoured to become KPMG South Africa’s Chairman. This is a defining time for our country and I believe our profession has a unique and vital role to play. As the firm rebuilds, I am confident that the reforms the leadership team is driving will mean that KPMG once again plays a leading part in ensuring that our economy is well run. I am determined that we do this by always providing our clients with service to the highest professional standards.” Ansie Ramalho added: “I look forward to using my experience to help KPMG as it looks to become industry leaders on corporate governance. All professional services firms need to ensure they have governance in place that is able to deal with the growing complexity of oversight and management.” Notes to editors: Prof Wiseman Nkuhlu Biography Prof Wiseman Nkuhlu is currently the Chancellor of the University of Pretoria and a member of the Advisory board of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA). Prof Nkuhlu has served as President of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants for two terms, from April 1998 to April 2000. He is passionately involved with the development of Black Accountants and is the Patron of the Nkuhlu School of Accounting of the University of Fort Hare. He served as Economic Advisor to the President of the Republic of South Africa, T M Mbeki, and as Chief Executive of the Secretariat of New Partnership for Africa’s Development NEPAD from 2000 to 2005, playing a major role in the elaboration of NEPAD policy framework and in promoting the programme both in Africa and internationally. He participates regularly as a speaker in international conferences on African Development issues and corporate governance. In recognition of his contribution to education, business and development, Professor Nkuhlu has received a number of awards, including Honorary Doctorates from the Universities of the Free State, Stellenbosch, Cape Town, Pretoria, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Witwatersrand and University of Fort Hare; and merit awards from the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce, Association for Advancement of Black Accountants of Southern Africa and the Black Management Forum. He was also awarded the President of Convocation Medal by the University of Cape Town in June 2004. The medal is awarded to graduates of UCT for outstanding community service. Ansie Ramalho Biography Ramalho currently serves as a professional non-executive director and is a consultant to the International Finance Corporation, a subsidiary of the World Bank. She also does ad hoc-consulting and writes, teaches and presents on the various aspects of corporate law, directors’ duties and corporate governance. She is a member of a number of technical committees, including the King Committee on Corporate Governance, the Integrated Reporting Committee of South Africa and the Global Reporting Initiative Focal Point Advisory Group. Ramalho was the appointed King IV Project Lead with responsibility for the successful finalisation of the King IV Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa, 2016. Her prior position at the IoDSA was that of Chief Executive. Before joining the IoDSA, she worked at KPMG in corporate restructuring and recovery and later as dedicated corporate governance specialists in internal audit. Ramalho is a lawyer by training and believes that corporate governance can and should be harnessed for the benefit of the economy, society and the natural environment. Statement issued by KPMG, 17 January 2018