The South African Communist Party congratulates the class of 2017 learners who successfully completed their National Senior Certificate. The SACP joins the Department and Minister of Higher Education and Training, Hlengiwe Mkhize, in calling on the successful Matriculants who have not yet secured a place at a university or college to apply immediately using the Department’s Central Applications Clearing House (CACH) system. The CACH system is a government online application portal designed for successful Matriculants who are seeking admission to higher education and training institutions.  The system assists prospecting students by sharing their matric results with higher education and training institutions countrywide, including Technical and Vocational Education and Training or TVET colleges, universities, Sector Education and Training Authorities or SETAs. Institutions with open study places, technical training opportunities, or apprenticeship slots then make them available to the most suitable applicants on the CACH database. While the 2017 National Senior Certificate results comprise of a number of notable and welcome improvements, such as increased number of distinctions and the fact that for the first time no district has performed below 50 per cent, in a number of areas it is very clear that greater attention is required. The provinces of Limpopo, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, even if they have achieved a welcome improvement, are still at the bottom compared to other provinces. Together with districts, schools and individual learners across all provinces that are at the bottom, the Provinces of Limpopo, Eastern Cape and KZN require a greater attention.  The SACP is also concerned about declines in other provinces. It is very important to examine the results scientifically and produce evidence based assessment why other provinces, districts, schools and learners perform better than others. More appropriate and targeted interventions are required to ensure improved results. The questions of a common curriculum between public and independent schools, uneven development and unequal distribution of resources between and within provinces, including the impact of social inequality on learner performance need attention. It is unfair to compare learners with massive access to resources and support with those who lack such access and support both at school and at home.  Investment is required to eliminate social and resource distribution inequality between and bring learners to a level playing field, a situation in which every learner has a fair and equal chance of succeeding. This is very important in curriculum including performance assessment. The SACP says to all those learners who did not successfully complete their National Senior Certificate, do not despair; repetition is the mother of learning. There are also other alternatives to success. The SACP calls on the progressive youth movement to include a strong element of academic support in youth and student activism. Success is as important as access in education! The SACP will support such efforts.      Statement issued by the SACP, 5 January 2017