Letter from EFF leader Julius Malema to Speaker of National Assembly, 30 January 2018 SPEAKER OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 30 JANUARY 2017 PARLIAMENT OF THE REPULIC OF SA CAPE TOWN 8000 Dear Speaker, We note the letter you sent on the 19th of January 2018 concerning the Motion of No Confidence, and the two letters you sent convening and rescheduling a meeting with Leaders of Political Parties in the 5th Democratic Parliament. We specifically note that the Party Leaders’ meeting, now scheduled for the 6th of February 2018 will, amongst other things, discuss the 2018 State of the Nation Address (SONA). We write to emphatically request that the meeting of Party Leaders and all programming meetings that will happen before SONA should necessary schedule the Motion of No Confidence to be held prior to the State of Nation Address. This is largely informed by the fact that there are serious political developments, and Court judgments which necessitate an urgent parliamentary sitting to entertain a Motion of No Confidence against Mr. Jacob Zuma. These relate to, but not limited to the Court judgment of impeachment, and the establishment of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry on State Capture. The EFF is of a firm belief that Parliament will reasonably reach a different conclusion on a Motion of No Confidence than in any of the previous sound attempts to rescue South Africa from an individual. A State President, who is destined for a judicial commission of inquiry cannot be suitable head of state and government, which is legislatively and practically defined by extremely busy programmes. The suitability of Mr. Jacob Zuma to continue in the office of President is more of an urgent question now than a SONA to be delivered by an incumbent who is on the verge of commissions and trials. Mr. Jacob Zuma should not be allowed to deliver the SONA prior to a decision on whether Parliament still has confidence in him to continue as a President. We therefore write to the Speaker to request that she must start processes of rescheduling Parliament programme if Mr. Jacob Zuma is still President. Failure to do so will leave us with no option, but to take up the issue during SONA. We believe that our firm and sensible request will be acceded, and await a prompt response, Regards, Julius Sello Malema President and Commander in Chief Economic Freedom Fighters Issued by the EFF, 31 January 2018