The African National Congress Youth League (ANCYL) is flabbergasted by Judge Bill Prinsloo’s ruling prohibiting the placement of 55 English-speaking learners in Höerskool Overvaal in Vereeniging. 17 January 2018 Judge Prinsloo contend that the department’s instruction to the school to accommodate the 55 English-speaking learners was unlawful and not supported by legislation and applicable legislations. As the Youth League we strongly believe that Judge Prinsloo did not only erred in his judgement, but it was a frontal attack on ANC-led government’s effort to build a single, democratic, non-racial and sexist public education system. The ruling is a clear demonstration that some untranformed Judges, still craving for the old Apartheid order, are abusing their influence or positions in the judiciary to undermine radical transformation agenda as advanced by the ANC. We applaud Gauteng’s MEC of Education cde Panyaza Lesufi for publicly indicating that his Department will appeal the ruling. This judgment if not challenged, it entrenched the old Apartheid segregation education system, as opposed to the democratic government’s efforts to build a people’s education for people’s power. The ANCYL will seek a bilateral with the Minister of Basic Education Cde Angie Motshekga, with a view to consider amending the South African Schools Act (SASA) in order for the Minister of Basic Education, as a custodian of public schooling, is democratically empowered to determine admission and language policy for all public schools in South Africa. We call on our historical and dealings ally COSAS to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Gauteng Department of Education and defend their terrain which is being attacked through this judgment. We cannot and we will never permit the minority to disadvantage the majority. We cannot undermine the rights of the majority in order to appease minority. Already Afrikaners have Orania if we don’t wake up and defend ourselves against these things the country will be back in their hands again. South Africa wake up. Issued by Mlondi Mkhize, National Spokesperson African National Congress Youth League, 17 January 2018