STATEMENT OF THE ANC NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOLLOWING NEC MEETING HELD FROM THE 18th TO THE 19th JANUARY 2018 The National Executive Committee (NEC) of the African National Congress (ANC) held its first ordinary meeting following its election at the 54thNational Conference on 18-19 January 2018 in Irene, Tshwane. The meeting held extensive discussion on the current political and economic environment following the presentation of a Political Overview by the President, Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa. The NEC noted that the excellent mobilisation for the ANC’s106th anniversary celebrations in East London a few days ago and the January 8th Statement itself has generated a great deal of excitement, hope and enthusiasm among our people. The NEC agreed that the ANC must act decisively and with determination to rebuild the bond of trust between our people and the movement, restore the dignity of our movement, and reclaim the moral legitimacy of our movement. The meeting agreed on the need to forge a social compact among government, business, labour and communites for economic recovery, drawing on the resolutions of the 54thNational Conference. The NEC also resolved on a number of organisational matters. These include: - The suspension of the Provincial Executive Committees of KwaZulu-Natal and Free State and the establishment of interim structures to unite and build the movement in preparation for provincial conferences. - The Officials, led by President Ramaphosa, will continue their engagement with President Jacob Zuma to ensure effective coordination between the ANC and government. The meeting elected members to the ANC National Working Committee, which is tasked with carrying out the decisions and instructions of the NEC and conduct the current work of the ANC. In addition to the six Officials, the newly-elected members of the NWC are: 1. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma 2. Lindiwe Sisulu 3. Naledi Pandor 4. Jeff Radebe 5. Angie Motshekga 6. Derek Hanekom 7. Edna Molewa 8. Thoko Didiza 9. Nomvula Mokonyane 10. Nathi Mthethwa 11. Ronald Lamola 12. Tina Joemat-Pettersson 13. Dakota Legoete 14. Senzo Mchunu 15. Zizi Kodwa 16. Tony Yengeni 17. Bathabile Dlamini 18. Nomaindia Mfeketo 19. Barbara Creecy 20. Thandi Modise The Presidents of each of the three leagues also serve on the NWC in an ex officio capacity. The NEC will be holding its bi-annual lekogtla from 20-21January 2018 to detail the programme for the movement in 2018. Statement issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, African National Congress, 20 January 2018 Update: ANC WELCOMES DECISIVE INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE GOVERNANCE AT ESKOM The African National Congress welcomes the decisive action taken by government to speedily intervene to address the challenges plaguing state energy utility, Eskom. Far reaching measures intended to improve governance as well as restore the integrity of the state owned company were announced today in a statement released by the Deputy President of the Republic, Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa. The appointment of an experienced, qualified and credible leadership to the Board of Eskom, as well as the injunction to immediately remove all executives implicated in corruption and other acts of impropriety at Eskom is in line with the key priorities of the African National Congress drawn from the 54th National Conference and the January 8 statement to restore the credibility of public institutions, state owned enterprises and law enforcement agencies. It is also practical action responding to our commitment to confront corruption and state capture in all its forms. The African National Congress wishes the newly appointed Board of Directors as well as Acting CEO Mr Phakamani Hadebe well in their quest to return Eskom to its rightful place as a high-performance organization with an ethical leadership at the helm. We further assure them of our unwavering support in their mission to serve the public in line with their development mandate. We are confident that these interventions serve to bring closer the realization of our commitment to mobilize all social partners behind an economic recovery plan based on, amongst others, protecting our public institutions from improper interference, stability and coherence of our economic policies, and proper governance and management of our state owned companies. Issued by the African National Congress, 20 January 2018