Education Department fails to pay school subsidies and deliver textbooks  The financially beleaguered Free State Department of Education has run out of cash. Again. The department has failed to pay the Fourth Quarter subsidies due to schools. Like clockwork, for several years now, schools are left to scramble to fund their day to day operations because the department cannot manage its finances properly. The department has also placed a moratorium on the employment of new teachers until the end of the current financial year. I have written to Finance MEC Elzabe Rockman and Education MEC Tate Makgoe urging them to ensure subsidies are paid to schools immediately. Failure to pay quarterly school subsidies on time has a negative impact on schools in the province, leaving them unable to meet their financial obligations. The delay in the appointment of teachers likewise has a negative impact on the delivery of education to learners. Some schools have also not yet received textbooks in time for the beginning of this school year. The DA contacted a random sample of 20 schools of which 10 confirmed that they have not received their subsidies as anticipated. Out of the 20 schools, 12 are dependent on the department for the provision of textbooks, but sadly 8 schools have not received any textbook deliveries to date. The department closed the central distribution warehouse in a bid to ensure that textbooks are delivered on time directly to schools by suppliers. We can only assume that these suppliers have also not be been paid yet. We are not yet at the end of January and Free State learners have had to consistently endure the service delivery failures of the Department of Education. Two weeks ago, Mangaung learners had to go to school under the severe conditions of a heat wave without access to water because the department failed to pay their municipal bills. Earlier this week 10 000 learners were left stranded at home due to the suspension of learner transport services due to the non-payment of contractors by the Department of Police, Roads and Transport since September last year. Thankfully, transport contractors resumed these services after the DA wrote to MEC Sam Mashinini to sort out the mess. This is exactly how the ANC in government mismanages the resources at their disposal. It has a direct negative impact on the lives of people, and in the case of education, on learners. The DA will continue to monitor the situation at Free State schools and do whatever we can to help. However, the problems in the department have persisted over several years now and the only way to solve them is to vote out the ANC and vote in the DA. Statement issued by Mariette Pittaway, DA MPL in the Free State Provincial Legislature, 26 January 2018