DA tables motion of no confidence in Magashule 30 January 2018 The DA late yesterday afternoon tabled a Motion of No Confidence (MONC) in Premier Ace Magashule to the Speaker of the Free State Provincial Legislature, Ms Mamiki Qabathe. See our submission here. The DA is of the strong view that the MONC is a matter of urgent public importance considering the extent of the R220 million Vrede Dairy Project scandal Premier Magashule is implicated in, however, this scandal is but the tip of the iceberg. Other scandals include the Letlaka Media buying scandal, the massive allegations of corruption within the Department of Police, Roads and Transport, the R95 million provincial website scandal, the R120 million Ramkraal Legislature Complex scandal and many more besides. The failure in governance under Premier Magashule, specifically with regards to the collapse in local government, the R6 billion Eskom bill, the R2 billion water board bill, the disintegration of the Department of Health, the problems within the Department of Education and the inertia of his government to effectively respond to the provincial water crisis as well as a general regression in audit outcomes, stagnant economic growth and increasing unemployment in the province also warrant his removal from office. As such, the DA urges Speaker Qabathe to convene a special sitting of the Legislature to debate and vote on the MONC before the State of the Province Address (SOPA) scheduled for the 20th of February 2018 in Parys, Premier Magashule’s home town. Last week, the Hawks raided the Office of the Premier as well as the office of the Department of Agriculture. Such raids could not have taken place without substantial prima facie evidence that motivate for a search and seizure warrant. The raids followed the seizure of assets at the Vrede Dairy Farm by the Asset Forfeiture Unit (AFU) two weeks ago. In addition to the numerous allegations of corruption Premier Magashule is implicated in, the functions of ANC Secretary-General, following his election last year, is incompatible with his constitutionally mandated functions as Premier. Premier Magashule’s announcement that he will resign his premiership at the end of March 2018, the end of the current financial year, indicates that he basically just wants to keep on receiving his massive salary and benefits for as long as possible. The MONC is an opportunity for members of the Legislature to remove a severely compromised Premier from office in the interest of the people of the Free State. It as an opportunity that could see the Free State begin to repair the damage inflicted on the province by the factional and selfish leadership synonymous with Premier Magashule’s tenure. It is an opportunity for a new beginning. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, Leader of the Official Opposition in the Free State Provincial Legislature, 30 January 2018