AfriForum accuses EFF leadership of inciting violence 15 January 2018 The civil rights organisation AfriForum today laid criminal complaints of inciting violence and various other crimes against the EFF’s Julius Malema, Floyd Shivambu and Mbuyiseni Ndlozi. These complaints stem from various statements made by them on public platforms which relate to the country-wide vandalisation of shops belonging to the H&M Concession. Their actions came as reaction against an allegedly racist advertisement by H&M in which a black boy was wearing a sweatshirt on which was printed “Coolest monkey in the jungle”. Ernst Roets, Deputy CEO of AfriForum, says that the leadership of the EFF – which includes Malema (Commander-in-Chief), Shivambu (Deputy President) and Ndlozi (Spokesperson) – accepted responsibility for the crimes committed at the H&M stores and that these crimes are actively incited on public platforms. Malema incited these actions in a political speech in Pietersburg (Polokwane), Limpopo, as well as on social media platforms. In reaction to a request that crime and violence should not be used to combat racism, Malema reacted on Twitter with the words: “We can’t be lectured by cowards on how to conduct revolution.” Shivambu posted photos of the vandalised shops on Twitter and commented: “That @hm nonsense of a clothing store is now facing consequences for its racism. All rational people should agree that the store should not be allowed to continue operating in South Africa. Well done to Fighters who physically confronted racism”. Ndlozi posted among other the following on Twitter: “In our vocab: anti-black racism is violence! U asking us to confront violence by giving the other check [sic]. BUT how many times have blacks given the other check [sic] on the racism question? Well there are no more cheeks left. We shall send petitions no longer, it’s time for Confrontation!” “The EFF’s reaction on the H&M advertisement is nothing more than a continuation of the party’s own racist political agenda,” says Roets. “It is honourable to object against racism. However, when violence is committed and actively incited, the responsible persons should be prosecuted.” Issued by Mariska Batt, Media Relations Officer, AfriForum, 15 January 2018