Commission of Inquiry urgently needed to probe extent of sexual abuse in GP schools The DA strongly condemns the disgusting behaviour displayed by the Reiger Park High School Principal after videos and photos went viral on social media of him allegedly having sex with learners in his office. It is an absolute disgrace that a principal who is supposed to be a true leader, a guardian and a shield to protect these learners from abuse within and outside the school premises is engaged in this type of behaviour. We welcome this sex-pest principal's immediate resignation from his post. However, he must not go unpunished for stripping these learners of their innocence and needs to face the full might of the law. This principal must be named and shamed for destroying the future and the dignity of our learners and should be be registered as a sexual offender. He must also be banned from ever working with children again. For far too long, the Gauteng Premier, David Makhura and the Gauteng Department of Education MEC, Panyaza Lesufi have ignored the DA’s call to establish a Commission of Inquiry to probe the extent of sexual abuse in Gauteng schools and to establish a toll-free line for learners to report sexual abuse in schools. The DA made this call last year after more than 87 learners were allegedly sexually abused by patrollers in Soweto schools. This problem is clearly far bigger than what we initially thought and requires greater intervention than the Premier's task team. There is no time line and no communication with regards to the findings of this task team and when its investigations will be completed. Sexual abuse in Gauteng schools goes beyond allegations against the patrollers as it also involves principals and educators. The scourge of violence against our learners has infiltrated every level of our education system. A Commission of Inquiry is the only way to deal with this pandemic. The DA also condemns those who are circulating the videos and pictures of the principal having sex with these learners as it violates the rights of these children. Possession of child pornography, as well as distributing it, is a criminal offence and charges should be laid against those who are breaking this law. Psychological counselling must be provided to the victims and their families. The DA will continue to put pressure on both the Premier and MEC to ensure that the Commission of Inquiry and a sexual abuse toll-free line is established as a matter of urgency. Our learners are the future leaders of this country and it is within their rights as guaranteed by the constitution to be protected against any sexual abuse, sexual exploitation and child pornography. Statement issued by Khume Ramulifho MPL, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 28 January 2018