Industry says goodbye to ad legend Bob Rightford by MarkLives. The industry reacts to the news of Bob Rightford's death, including a tribute by Matthew Bull. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Jabulani Sibiyaby Veli Ngubane. Jabulani Sibiya is now calling Joburg home as he takes on lead strategist role on one of South Africa’s most-iconic brands. We find out more. Masego Motsogi joins Grid as MDby MarkLives. Masego Motsogi has been appointed as managing director of Grid Worldwide as of 1 February 2018. Big Q 2018 Expectations:- #BigQ2018: The year the ‘new’ independents keep on disrupting —Mpange Chapeshamano & Mthunzi Plaatjie- #BigQ2018: Blend talent diversity, operational transparency to grow — Peter Khoury- #BigQ2018: Brand films are TVCs that aren’t scared to be overly sexy — Lebogang Rasethaba- #BigQ2018: Creative effectiveness is channel-agnostic — Odette van der Haar- It’s official — a renaissance in B2B is on the way — Mark Eardley- Five marketing trends for 2018 — Charlie Stewart Cover Stories: Top 5 SA mag covers for 2017 — nicheby Shane de Lange. There are so few independent publications being produced in South Africa, which is all the more reason to support those that are being produced. Regular Reads: - Shelf Life: Tag 8 telling success stories for Retail Capital- SA TV Ratings: SABC 1 — primetime top 20 for Dec, Nov 2017 On the Radar: - Red & Yellow opens bursary applications for 2018- 5 WPP brand agencies combined into Superunion- Global adspend to hit US$572bn in 2018- Montego Pet Nutrition appoints PR partner- Conference: Marketing Disruptions 2018 — MarkLives reader discount! Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up here for the MarkLives email newsletter every Monday and Thursday. Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.