Spike in attacks on MyCiTi buses as criminals sabotage public transport in Metro South-east Eight MyCiTi buses were attacked in Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain over the past weekend. The spike in stoning incidents along the N2 Express routes is in all likelihood related to our efforts to assist rail commuters who are left stranded due to the service disruptions on the Metrorail Central Line. Read more below: ‘The sabotage of public transport services in the Metro South-east has reached unprecedented levels. The Metrorail Central Line has experienced severe disruptions the past few weeks, and is currently temporarily suspended. It seems that criminals are now also focusing on destabilising the MyCiTi bus service. ‘Up to eight stoning incidents took place along the N2 Express routes in Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain on Friday and Saturday. We have never before had so many attacks on our buses on one weekend. Most disturbingly, one of our passengers was injured and had glass splinters removed from his eyes,’ said the City of Cape Town’s Mayoral Committee Member for Transport and Urban Development, Councillor Brett Herron. The stoning incidents happened on Friday and Saturday evening while the buses were driving along the N2 freeway opposite Langa, along AZ Berman Drive in Mitchells Plain, and in Site C in Khayelitsha. ‘Nine windows and one windscreen were smashed during these attacks. Apart from the cost to replace the windows, the buses will be out of service for at least three to four days while the repairs are being done – this in a time when we need all of the resources at our disposal to meet the passenger demand. ‘We have been deploying additional MyCiTi buses on the N2 Express routes between Cape Town and Khayelitsha since December last year to assist rail commuters who are stranded due to the service disruptions on the Metrorail Central Line. As far as I am concerned, criminals are hell-bent on bringing public transport in the Metro South-east to a complete halt. They are now targeting the MyCiTi service because many rail commuters are relying on our buses to get to work and school,’ said Councillor Herron. Over the past two years the number of passenger journeys on the four N2 Express routes has nearly doubled from 111 109 in November 2015 to 219 157 in November last year. ‘First of all, the statistics confirm that more commuters from Mitchells Plain and Khayelitsha are relying on the MyCiTi service to reach their destinations; and secondly, it also confirms that the exceptional growth of the MyCiTi passenger numbers on the Cape Flats coincides with the deterioration of the Metrorail Central line over the same period. ‘I deplore these senseless attacks. We cannot allow criminal elements to bring public transport on the Cape Flats to a halt. I urge the South African Police Service to investigate these incidents as a matter of urgency. Those responsible must be arrested and prosecuted. I am also appealing to our residents to please report suspicious activities so that we can protect our public transport assets,’ said Councillor Herron. In the meantime, all enforcement agencies are assisting with the monitoring of public transport routes, and MyCiTi buses are being deviated from potential hotspots as far as possible. Anyone with information about these incidents or other suspicious activities are requested to contact the Transport Information Centre on 0800 65 64 63. Statement issued by Councillor Brett Herron, Mayoral Committee Member for Transport and Urban Development, City of Cape Town, 29 January 2018