Mbalula promises swifter police action after cleanup in Mogale City Johannesburg – Police Minister Fikile Mbabula on Monday said he was happy with efforts to fix the leadership within the police, but reiterated that police must act swiftly when responding to complaints. Mbalula was speaking outside a dilapidated house in Mogale City, which was the scene of violent protests a week ago when residents went on a rampage against suspected drug dealers and people accused of human trafficking. Mbalula returned on Monday to accompany police in the demolition of dilapidated houses suspected of being drug dens, along with updating the communities about the police’s plans to address their concerns. "In terms of the undertakings, we came, we listened to the community, the community complained about police leadership in the surrounding areas, they complained about drug trafficking, human trafficking…" he said. "Old dilapidated buildings, which is a general issue in South Africa in the municipalities, we said those buildings should be destroyed." He said the taking down and sealing of problem buildings would be an attempt to address crime issues and added that local leadership had a "lacklustre" approach as the police were not being forceful in addressing drug traffickers. "It must be clear to all drug lords, we will identify and destroy drug dens, we can't live side by side with criminals. The police must exact the authority of the state," Mbalula said. He said some in the dens were arrested for drug possession and others for possession of illegal property, such as vehicles. Mbalula said station commanders were being changed at two police stations in an effort to intensify Operation Fiela. "I am very happy. We are moving and we are decisive in what we do and I am encouraged by the efforts of the leadership in acting swiftly and decisive," he said. He also addressed the recent vacancy left by the removal of Richard Mdluli, who had been suspended as head of crime intelligence before he was fired earlier this month. Mbalula said the positions for the head of crime intelligence and the Hawks would be advertised soon. "My point has always been clear. I want stability in the police," he said. News24