Life Esidimeni: I cannot carry personal blame, says Mahlangu 25 January 2018 Johannesburg - Former Gauteng Health MEC Qedani Mahlangu says she cannot carry personal blame for the death of 143 Life Esidimeni mentally ill patients. "I cannot carry personal blame, I was not working for my personal self," Mahlangu said on Thursday. "I carry the political blame simply because of the position I held at the time," she said. Mahlangu was testifying for a third day at the Life Esidimeni arbitration hearings in Parktown, Johannesburg. Lilla Crouse, a Legal Aid advocate, who was seemingly not impressed with Mahlangu's answers, grilled her and asked if the closure of Life Esidimeni was ever discussed in the provincial health council meetings which she chaired. "No, it wasn't," she replied. 'I'm not a lawyer' She also said the decision to terminate the contract was a cost containment measure, and not an executive decision. "Ever since I have been in the executive council, contractual matters have never been presented to the council..." Crouse also pressed her on whether the Life Esidimeni decision had legal consequences. But Mhlangu said: "I don't understand the question. I'm not a lawyer." At one point Mahlangu asked to speak in Zulu in order to express herself better. An interpreter was called and she told the hearing that she found herself in a difficult situation while testifying. "The questions I am being asked are very technical and there's no politician in South Africa that can understand exactly what happens in their department. "I feel I am being constrained and I feel I am being asked questions that are beyond my role as a politician." Some members of the crowd reacted in disbelief when she requested to speak in Zulu and one said: "She must just answer questions." Crouse also quizzed Mahlangu on claims that the move was a cost-cutting exercise. She said the process would have cost more per patient at some hospitals, which defeated the purpose. But Mahlangu, without giving a direct answer, said she did not know how much money was saved. "I'm no longer in the system," she said. On Wednesday, Adila Hassim, the advocate representing Section 27, also asked Mahlangu about the transferring of patients to Weskoppies and Sterkfontein psychiatric facilities. Hassim said it would have would have cost "six times as much" to take care of patients, defeating the point of the cost-cutting exercise. Mahlangu said the institutions were academic hospitals. The hearing continues. News24