Drownings remain cause for concern as the festive season winds down A 63-year-old man was declared dead at Kalk Bay Harbour this weekend, taking the number of drowning incidents since 1 December to 14. Read more below: A 63-year-old Mitchells Plain resident drowned at Kalk Bay Harbour on Sunday 7 January 2018. The incident is the fourteenth confirmed drowning at beaches along the city’s coast since 1 December 2017. The victim jumped into the water from the jetty just before 08:00 and got into trouble. He was pulled out by a worker in the area. Paramedics performed CPR but the man was declared dead on the scene. ‘The number of drowning incidents over this festive season has been heart-breaking, particularly when the circumstances in many cases suggest they could have been prevented. Swimming outside of designated areas remains one of the main contributing factors with 11 of the 14 drownings occurring as a result of failing to adhere to these safety guidelines. Apart from ongoing education and awareness which we are already doing, I’m not sure what additional steps can be taken to prevent this. City and NSRI staff have been patrolling the coast in an attempt to direct people towards safer swimming areas,’ said the City’s Mayoral Committee Member for Safety and Security; and Social Services, Alderman JP Smith. In terms of alcohol confiscations from the beaches and other public spaces, the City has booked in 11 210 bottles at its Ndabeni pound since 1 December, totalling 7 935 litres. The City’s regulations make provision for the public to collect their confiscated alcohol from the pound within three months provided that they pay a release fee of R1 400. Any alcohol not collected within this period will be disposed of in the coming months. Elsewhere, City Law Enforcement officers arrested 10 suspects for possession of tik in separate incidents on the Grand Parade and surrounds over the weekend. The suspects were aged between 27 and 48. Traffic Services conducted a number of roadblocks throughout the city and arrested 26 suspects - 19 for driving under the influence of alcohol, six for outstanding warrants and made one other arrest. Officers also issued 398 fines for various other offences. The Metro Police Department added 9 arrests to the list of suspects, including a 34-year-old man on a charge of assault. Officers on patrol in Langa on Sunday 7 January 2018 noticed a man brandishing a knife and being chased by a group of people. The officers intervened and were informed that the suspect had assaulted a woman. He was arrested on a charge of assault and for being in possession of a dangerous weapon. The suspect was detained at Langa police station. The weekend successes come on the back of 1 895 arrests by the City’s enforcement agencies during December 2017. Below is a snapshot of the successes by department:  METRO POLICE: - 4 511 vehicles stopped - 2 994 drivers tested for DUI - 106 drunk driving arrests - 139 drug-related arrests - 102 general arrests - 10 049 traffic and by-law fines issued - Six firearms and 75 rounds of ammunition confiscated - Five stolen vehicles recovered LAW ENFORCEMENT: - 107 arrests - 10 532 traffic and by-law fines issued - 376 warrants executed - 6 733 general impoundments - Four vehicles impounded CAPE TOWN TRAFFIC SERVICE: - 17 070 drivers tested for DUI - 1 441 arrests, including 588 for drunk driving and 449 for outstanding warrants - 269 609 fines issued - 501 cellphone impoundments ‘These statistics are testament to the hard work of our enforcement services and the long hours that they put in over the festive season to keep residents and visitors safe. It is no easy feat handling the crowds that come with the festive season and the often frayed tempers involved, so I commend the teams for a job well done. That said, we will maintain a high level of vigilance for the remainder of the school holiday and switch our enforcement focus appropriately once everyone is back at school and work,’ added Alderman Smith. Statement issued by Alderman JP Smith, Mayoral Committee Member for Safety and Security; and Social Services, City of Cape Town, 8 January 2018