Taking land will turn SA into the Garden of Eden: Ramaphosa Nongoma - South Africa could turn into the ultimate paradise with the implementation of the policy of expropriation of land without compensation, ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa said in Nongoma, Kwazulu-Natal on Sunday. "In fact, it is possible for us to begin a process of working the land and improving agriculture – making it a very successful factor in our country," Ramaphosa said, addressing King Goodwill Zwelithini at Osuthu Palace – explaining the ANC’s decision to implement a policy of land expropriation. "We can make this country the garden of Eden," the new ruling party head said at a meeting to introduce the ANC’s new top six leaders to the Zulu king. In his address at the meeting, Zwelithini then urged Ramaphosa to pursue this policy.  He said that "only a very small proportion" of the people had had their land returned to them. "We look to you to act…with speed." Zwelithini also congratulated former ANC president Jacob Zuma for "handing over power with dignity" – and acknowledged that the leadership elections at the party’s December conference had proven that "it is possible to hand over power without any issue." Earlier, there was a jovial atmosphere as various ANC officials arrived for the meeting.  Ramaphosa was seen dancing with the king and gifts of cattle were exchanged. In December, the ANC held its 54th national conference in Johannesburg. Ramaphosa was elected as president and joined by David Mabuza as Deputy President, Gwede Mantashe as National Chairperson, Ace Magashule as Secretary General and Jessie Duarte as his deputy. Paul Mashatile rounded up the powerful grouping with his election as Treasurer General. - News24 Ramaphosa calls for unity at ANC 106 anniversary celebrations in Durban Durban – ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa has called on the ruling party to go back to its roots and emulate the leadership of previous "legends" who led the liberation movement. "With humility, I am in awe and humbled to be here, where the remains of one of the greatest sons of SA, John Dube, who I can draw lessons from, rests. We in the ANC top six need to learn from them, humble ourselves in the service of our people. He served with humility, modesty and commitment. We must do the same." He made the statement during a wreath-laying ceremony for founder of the ANC John Dube at the Ohlange High School in Inanda on Monday. Surrounded by a large contingent of top ANC national leaders, Ramaphosa appeared confident and strong. According to Ramaphosa, the newly elected leadership of the ANC would focus strongly on rooting out corruption. "We will adopt a value system to root out corruption within our ranks. Corruption undermines the interest of our people as a whole. As we do this we will be strengthening the ANC." He added that the party would aim to strengthen its core constituency through branches. "We want to strengthen our branches, make sure they are alive." KZN and drawing from past leaders Because of its size and influence, Ramaphosa implored the ANC eThekwini region to "show good leadership and lead by example for all our regions in our country". "Our ANC's first president lies in this region. You are fortunate to have the spirit of our people here. We hope the influence of the great leaders that come from KZN are taught in schools in our country." He made a strong call for the newly elected leadership to learn from past members of the ANC. "I hope we can draw lessons from their lives. How they adhered to truthfulness and honesty. Promote the interest of our people. We say President Dube, this new leadership will not fail or soil the reputation of the movement you led." Staying focused on KZN, Ramaphosa mentioned that, through King Goodwill Zwelithini, he had seen progress in unity. "Yesterday we met with the king and we saw two groups, Sihle Zikalala and Senzo Mchunu, come together. They shook hands. It was a joy to see them shaking hands and agreeing to forge unity." He emphasised that KZN had an integral role to play in South Africa's democracy. "In KZN, our programme is singular and one. That programme is to forge unity. We will do this. KZN has made a contribution to our struggle. We want you to unite and be one. KZN is far too important to the life and existence of ANC." He also said the ANC would focus on bringing traditional leaders to the fore to lead. "We will go to all our traditional leaders and give them a report back of the ANC 54th elective conference. "Traditional leaders play a great role. The ANC used to have a house of traditional leaders." Land Ramaphosa stuck to his guns with the land reparations matter, saying that the new leadership of the ANC was focused on the task. "We will move with speed to return the land to our people. We want to advance the interests of our people and develop the economy of our country. We have NEC members here today. We have got to advance the interests of our people through the economy. John Dube would have wanted us to push radical economic transformation for the interest of all our people." - News24 Land restoration will not be 'smash and grab' – Ramaphosa Durban – The process of restoring land to previously disadvantaged South Africans will be conducted with great care, ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa has said. He was speaking at the gravesite of Chief Albert Luthuli earlier on Monday, following a number of wreath-laying ceremonies at the gravesites of former ANC presidents, where a number of senior ANC officials were in attendance ahead of the ANC's 106th-year anniversary in East London this coming weekend. Ramaphosa strongly backed the returning of land to black South Africans. He said the process of land restoration would not be a "smash and grab" operation. "We must not even see it as taking land from people. We are merely restoring land to its original owners. As this happens, we will keep in mind securing important resources such as food security. Farm production must go up and so must the economy." He said with the restoration of land, "we must make sure we grow our economy and empower our people". "We will come up with tactics and plans for practical implementation." Luthuli 'a good example for unity' Ramaphosa went on to sing Luthuli's praises, saying the struggle hero had sacrificed his own comfort for the greater good. He said Luthuli was iconic in his mentality as a leader. "He was once told by the minister of native affairs that he had to choose between being a chief or a member of the ANC. He immediately chose the ANC. This decision was at great personal cost to himself." He said Luthuli could have lived a comfortable life but chose the struggle. "He chose between prestige and struggle. He chose the ANC at a time when just being affiliated with the ANC would get you harassed or even arrested. He lived a life of courage in the face of adversity." Ramaphosa also lauded Luthuli's ability to foster unity. "This is something we can take with ourselves today." Focus on corruption He repeated his call for unity in KwaZulu-Natal. He made a similar plea when he visited the gravesite of John Dube in Inanda earlier in the day. "KZN is a place full of legends. Legends of the struggle that we can all learn from. This province has made a great contribution to the struggle and it is an essential part of our country." Earlier, Ramaphosa said the newly elected leadership of the ANC would focus strongly on rooting out corruption. "We will adopt a value system to root out corruption within our ranks. Corruption undermines the interest of our people as a whole. As we do this, we will be strengthening the ANC." He added that the party would aim to strengthen its core constituency through branches. "We want to strengthen our branches, make sure they are alive." Ramaphosa is expected to visit Xhosa King Zwelonke Sigcawu and Rharhabe Queen Noloyiso Sandile in the Eastern Cape. - News24