DA disintegrates at a faster speed 10 January 2018  The ANC Western Cape says the DA’s time in government is up. The DA’s spectacular implosion continues as it falls apart at great speed. The latest developments around Cape Town DA mayor Patricia de Lille shows up the DA as inept in managing anything – let alone managing its own party affairs. The DA is now out to sacrifice scapegoats for DA failures and mismanagement of water, and as soon as it deposed of De Lille will it embark on a full witch-hunt to purge the party of various factions in order to promote the angry English liberal hegemony manipulated and controlled by the likes of DA federal executive chair James Selfe and the ilk. The ANC says it is clear that the new DA leader of the Western Cape Bonginkosi Madikizela flees the legislature to take refuge at Cape Town as replacement for De Lille. This is to prevent further action after various complaints against him and his partner, health MEC Nomafrench Mbombo, for failing to declare their members interests as required by law. Various attempts were made by the DA to allow its provincial leader to get away with impunity for expensive parties in posh hotels. First the chair of the conduct committee Lennit Max was replaced, the legislature registrar removed and replaced. Eventually Max was robbed of the position as provincial leader when he stood against Madikizela. ANC Western Cape leader in the legislature Khaya Magaxa says: “Premier Helen Zille’s favourite Madikizela is now rescued and deployed to Cape Town. It is an indication that Zille still pulls strings behind the scenes to promote and position those she likes. “But, Madikizela is handed a poisoned chalice as the present DA problems started under erstwhile mayor Zille… Like the dwindling water supply and poor management of the resource, corruptive actions with the new transport system to the mega soccer stadium. “De Lille may be ejected to make way for Madikizela – who is now said to be rejected as future premier to follow after Zille – but, the ills of the DA will not go away. It will intensify. Therefore the DA is on a slippery slope as it has already shed about half of its support base in recent months.” Issued by Cobus Grobler on behalf of ANC WCape, 10 January 2018  