Vat Alles disrupts the new EPWP programme 04 January 2018 The Member of the Mayoral Committee, Cllr Cilliers Brink has noted with concern the disruptions of the EPWP programme at Region 1 and 3 by the disgruntled “Vat Alles” group, whose contracts came to an end on 31 December 2017. This follows a spate of threats and attacks to the newly appointed “Gata le Nna” EPWP contract workers and city officials. The DA-led government has from the start promised transparency in all city projects and will not be deterred by politically motivated disruptions to sabotage service delivery to the citizens of Tshwane. In Region 1, a Waste Management Supervisor was assaulted by the previous Vat Alles EPWP group at Winterveldt. The group also threatened the newly recruited Gata le Nna EPWP workers with violence if they continue to report for duty. In Region 3, trucks were stopped from transporting workers from Attridgeville and Lotus Gardens to the city by disgruntled Vat Alles group. This has subsequently affected service delivery in the CBD. The City wishes to assure the newly appointed Gata le Nna EPWP contract beneficiaries, that all possible precautions will be followed to ensure their safety while individuals exercise their right to equal and open appointment to job opportunities in the City of Tshwane. “Gata le Nna” is a reformed EPWP recruitment policy framework that was passed by Council on 28 September 2017 as a principle of ‘Good Governance’ that was adopted by the DA-led multiparty administration as one of its strategic priorities.  One of the proposed amendments to the revised policy includes the registration of eligible EPWP beneficiaries on a Central Database, with beneficiaries selected through an open and audited lottery-like system. In November 2017 the city went on a fair and transparent Recruitment Drive which saw over 120 000 Tshwane residents registered on the EPWP database. Previous “Vat Alles” workers were also advised to register on the database so that they would be eligible for EPWP job opportunities. The City will continue with the random selection of EPWP workers which is open to public observation and such selection process will also be published in advance in the Wards and Regions from which the EPWP beneficiaries will be recruited. The City again confirms its determination to deliver quality and efficient services to all residents of City of Tshwane. The DA-led administration remains committed to democracy, accountability and transparency in the execution and implementation of government programmes. Statement issued by Councillor Cilliers Brink, Member of the Mayoral Committee: Corporate and Shared Services, City of Tshwane, 4 January 2017