Dan Bovu’s arrest exposes ANC Gauteng’s rot 17 January 2018 This morning’s arrest of ANC City of Johannesburg Councillor, Dan Bovu and a second accused is long overdue and is a victory for the people of City of Johannesburg. Bovu was the City’s MMC for Housing under former ANC Mayor Parks Tau. Under the ANC, the City of Johannesburg was a feeding trough for dishonest officials and corrupt politicians who used the people’s money and resources as their own. This happened while David Makhura and Paul Mashatile looked the other way. It is for this reason why Mayor Herman Mashaba declared corruption as ‘enemy number 1’, an enemy which stole from the people and undermined development and opportunities. The complainant who laid charges against Bovu was allegedly told to pay R5000 for a stand in the Vlakfontein area. After he paid R5000 for the stand the second accused told him to come on a weekend to choose a stand which he likes. The complainant alleged that he started building the foundation of the house on the stand he chose. When the walls were still being built, the complainant alleged that he was told by his builders that an ANC Councillor (Dan Bovu) stopped them from continuing with building the house. He allegedly left his contact details with the builders so that the complainant could call him. After he contacted Dan Bovu, and visited him in his Zachariyya Park Office, Bovu allegedly told the complainant to pay a deposit of between R2000 and R4000 into the account of the Thembelihle Development Trust. The complainant allegedly paid R2000 into an account number that was given to him. He then continued to build until the house was complete. The second complainant also allegedly approached Bovu about the sale of stands in the area. He was told that another stand in Vlakfontein was available for R4000. The complainant allegedly paid the money into the Thembelihle Trust Account as directed by Bovu. A few days later, Bovu allegedly demanded a further R1000 which he said was for registration with the City of Johannesburg. Upon coming into office, the multi-party coalition government in the City became aware of this case, and tabled a motion before Council in September 2017. The motion authorised Mayor Mashaba to petition the NPA to provide reasons as to why the case had been declined for prosecution, despite what appeared to be a case with strong evidence. To the credit of the NPA, they have engaged with the all of our Council and acted to ensure that Councillor Bovu has his day in court. It is disingenuous of the ANC in Johannesburg to claim that this is a witch hunt, as the DA is committed to rooting out corruption – as has been evidenced in the action we have taken against our own when allegations have been presented to us. The ANC, whether in Gauteng or at Luthuli, is dead and cannot self-correct; it is for this reason why the people of Gauteng will vote for a new beginning under a DA-led government, which free from corruption. Issued by John Moodey, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 17 January 2018