EFF rejects the impression that Cabinet makes appointment of SABC executives 16 January 2018 The EFF rejects the impression created by Minister of Communications Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane that cabinet makes appointments of SABC executives. This  Kubayi-Ngubane has done by saying “all appointments of the chief operating officer, chief executive officer and chief financial officer of State-owned entities are done through Cabinet processes and therefore the announcements of the outcome are made by Cabinet”. She went on to say "It is the minister's responsibility to present any appointment of executives of the SoEs under the Department of Communications through Cabinet processes. To this end, the minister has no knowledge of any official appointment of a COO of SABC”. We reject this as yet another attempt to interfere with the independence of the SABC Board in doing its work. On 6 December 2017, the North Gauteng High Court ordered that the appointment of executive members of the SABC must be done by non-executive members of the SABC Board. The court further indicated that appointments will be done after consultation with the Minister, which means her opinion is not binding to the choices of executive appointments by the board. In all the stages of the appointments of executives, there is nowhere it includes cabinet. It may very well be that cabinet is informed, but this is a mere matter of noting. The cabinet has no role, neither the President, in the appointment of SABC executives. We advise Kubayi-Ngubane to resist returning the public broadcaster into the route of disreputable political interference it suffered under Faith Muthambi. The idea that SABV is a Public Broadcaster rests precisely and entirely in respecting the appointment process of executives. If these are to be done by cabinet, then not only will the SABC Board be rendered irrelevant, it will mean ours is now fully a State Broadcaster. The EFF calls on the Board to stand its ground as the law is on their side and resist all temptations to be bullied by the arrogant Zuma mascot Minister Kubayi-Nguban. Issued by Mbuyiseni Quinti Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 16 January 2018