Tshwane City Manager laughs off desperate DA and it’s Executive Mayor 3 December 2018 The City Manager of Tshwane Dr. Moeketsi Mosola has noted the Democratic Alliances’ (DA) statement distributed to the media last Friday with the laughable laying of criminal charges against him. These pathetic attention seeking media tactics, political conspiracies including daily leaks to particular journalists smacks’ of desperation by the Executive Mayor – Solly Msimanga. On the same Friday, the DA in Tshwane region, together with their Provincial and Federal leadership convened a high level political meeting where a political conspiracy against Dr. Mosola was discussed and planned in detail. The internal national DA political meeting took a decision that they will use the Auditor General of South Africa (AGSA) Report to leak it as they did with their henchmen lawyers Bowmans-Gilfillan bogus report to continue rubbishing Dr. Mosola’s good name and unembellished professional career. Important to note is – the use of Chapter 9 institutions reports as a tool to conduct political witch-hunt against Accounting Officers is illegal. For a party that claims to govern well – mounting a witch-hunt to get rid of the City Manager using preliminary reports and half-truths is a clear confirmation of ethical and moral bankruptcy by Solly Msimanga and his DA. Ethical and moral bankruptcy is the foundation of corruption and disregard for the citizens. Dr. Mosola’s only obligation is to the citizens of the City of Tshwane and owes them his patriotism which he will continue to demonstrate by executing his duties as directed by law. Since his appointment 18 months ago, Dr. Mosola with the help of dedicated professionals and employees of the City of Tshwane has changed its fortunes around. Any notion that Dr. Mosola is undermining the people of Tshwane is false and devoid of any truth. These positive fortunes continue to benefit the citizens in a profound way and this inspires Dr. Mosola in his unwavering resolve to never undermine the people he is hired to serve. He is dedicated to continue implementing the Integrated Development Plan, SDBIPS and the procurement plan diligently as these represent a good contract with the people of Tshwane. The City of Tshwane continues to satisfactorily build houses, close potholes, fix traffic lights, ensure stable electricity supply, clean cemeteries and create jobs for the citizens so that they can support their families. While continuing to improve service delivery and understanding that more must be done – the City of Tshwane is doing well compared to other Metro’s in Gauteng and nationally, for example: 1.     When Dr. Mosola joined the City of Tshwane in March 2017 – its finances were in tatters with almost R2 billion irregular expenditure, massive fruitless expenditure and was on the verge of technically insolvency. In 18 months mainly due to closing opportunities for corruption and stealing by city politicians and officials, Dr. Mosola has turned Tshwane’s finances around; 2.     In May this year Moody’s rating agency rewarded his efforts with a rating improvement from negative to stable. Thereby reducing the cost of financing debt and making more money available for service delivery. Also, at the conclusion of the of the financial year 2017/18 – the City of Tshwane was sitting on cash surplus of approximately R2,8 billion of cash surplus; 3.     The clinics and hospitals in the City of Tshwane are rated the best in the country in a study conducted by the National Health Ombudsman office. The citizens of Tshwane enjoy a superior quality of health than other metros in South Africa; 4.     The economy of Tshwane is the fastest growing in Africa and 17th fastest in the world, allowing the metro to create jobs at the rate of 7,8% according to the Brookings Institute report released in May 2018. More job opportunities are created in Tshwane than any other Metro’s in South Africa; and 5.     According to the SA Cities Network report released in 2017 – the City of Tshwane is the safest metro in South Africa to live when compared to others. Dr. Mosola says, “I am not a politician nor do I have ambitions to become one – therefore, I leave politics to the politicians however – I will never allow myself or those that report to me to be bullied by politicians. If Solly Msimanga and his DA cabal think for a minute that their unrelenting use of ‘STRATCOM’ tactics with leaks to the media to support their warped narrative will deter me from carrying out my duties – they are mistaken.” Dr. Mosola as the accounting officer along with his management team furnished the AGSA with all the information and documentary evidence emanating from the all findings as per the preliminary report of the Auditor General on the City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality for the year ended 30 June 2018. As a matter of fact – the information and documentary evidence provided Is under consideration by the AGSA. For the sake of posterity, Dr. Mosola believes that South Africa should never tolerate bullying of public servants by politicians and public servants must never cower to dirty political tricks into unethical conduct and behaviour. Encouraged by the bold statements from Ms. Ayanda Dlodlo – the Minister of Public Service Administration, Dr. Mosola urges South Africans to give the support to public servants who are on the right side of the law to root out corruption by political bullies. “Our people are not fools. The citizens of Tshwane and the South African public can see through the DA’s witch-hunt and attempts to persecute and judge me in the court of public opinion. Lest we forget that it is the same DA that produced a fake report with a forged signature and in the name of the Auditor General in an witch-hunt to get rid of the former Mayor of Cape Town, Ms. Patricia De Lille. The very DA used lawyers Bowmans-Gilfillan to produce two contradicting reports about the very former Mayor of Cape Town. A pattern is distilling itself here – DA is a party that resorts to falsehoods and dirty tricks while misusing public funds to get rid corruption busters. The truth always wins and it vindicate me,” concludes Dr. Mosola. Issued by Lorato Tshenkeng on behalf of Dr Moeketsi Mosola, 3 December 2018