REVOLUTIONARY MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL. Monday, 24 December, 2018 The EFF wishes all South Africans, and the people of the world, a Revolutionary Merry Christmas. We take this opportunity to convey our solidarity, first and foremost, to all people who are underprivileged, poor, landless, homeless and sickly. A revolutionary Christmas must be based on the important words of Christian scripture, found in Mat. 25/35-40: "For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was ill and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me." 'Then the righteous will answer him, "Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you? When did we see you ill or in prison and go to visit you?" '"And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these... ye have done it unto me." In light of these words, we call on all our people to reject bourgeois Christmas practices, whose objectives and emphasis are selfishness, individualism and family oriented. The true test of remembering the birth of Jesus, and the sharing/gifting that should be associated with it, is to reach out to the less privileged. The estranged family with an infant, living in a manger. Like the three wisemen from the east, we too must travel to find baby Jesus with his mother Mary and father Joseph who are frustrated, homeless and without food, sharing a space inside the manger with horses, and other animals. Let there be food for the street kids this Christmas. Let us remember all who are in hospitals and prisons. Let us remember those who are homeless and less privileged. Let us also take care of the elderly and the children. Let no one go hungry or homeless when any of you are there. Furthermore, we take this opportunity to remember the people of Bethlehem, where Jesus was born, in Palestine. We remember that they live under the military occupation of the apartheid state of Israel, and denied basic human rights by that racist regime. We call on all people of the world, to remember Palestine and isolate Israel this Christmas, by boycotting all its goods and services. We must renew our commitment to participate in the international isolation of apartheid Israel, through boycotts, divestments, and sanctions, until Israel ends its occupation of Palestine recognizes Palestinian's rights of retum, and their equal rights. Revolutionary and Merry Christmas to you all. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 24 December 2018