No salary increases for parliamentarians and better the standards of living for the poor 10 December 2018 The National Union of Public Service and Allied Workers (NUPSAW) appreciates the President’s critical thinking around economic status quo in South Africa. The President’s decision not to increase the salaries of his cabinet shows that he realises the effect that this bloated cabinet has on our economy. The Officials that will not receive an increase include inter alia: The Deputy President, Ministers and the Deputy Ministers. NUPSAW expects the Parliament to do the right thing and not approve salary increase for the President as well. Corruption and absurd salary increase for Government officials are one of the obstacles to economic liberation for ordinary South Africans. NUPSAW members voiced their opinions on the President’s decision not to increase the salaries of some of the Public Representatives. “…as we are fighting inequality in South Africa a cleaner earns a mere R4500 a month while the CEO earns R1m. That’s nonsense.” Says Mokhine Prof’molemi Ernest. Ntate Sekgotla says “With the current economic and social trajectory, there is a need to start a debate on national maximum wage. Balance is needed.” “we should start debating how much should be a salary of a CEO vs Salary of lowest employee in SOE or Government Department. We cannot only discuss minimum and not touch maximum wage which is obviously a seriously living wage compared to minimum wage” says Lebotsa Chipane Austion. These are the understandable concerns voiced by our members. It doesn’t need one to be an Economist to realise that South African Economy is sinking, seeing the number of people who are continuously losing their jobs and the looming retrenchments, thanks to the greedy Government Officials who are only thinking through their stomachs. The running of the Cabinet is estimated to be approximately R720 million annually. It is common cause that a large number of these Public representatives unduly benefit from government tenders and businesses, having their salaries increased would have made no sense. The electorate is sinking in poverty while those they elected are enjoying a luxurious life at their expense. Issued by Thariza Steyn, Communications and Media Officer, NUPSAW, 10 December 2018