15 December 2018  PRESS STATEMENT ON THE PRE-LAUNCH CONFERENCE HELD IN BIRCHWOODS 14-15 DECEMBER The Socialist Revolutionary Workers Party (SRWP) held a two-day pre-launch conference in Birchwoods in Ekurhuleni. One thousand one hundred delegates representing all nine provinces gathered for the first national meeting of the party. The purpose of the meeting was to assess how far we have come in setting up structures for the party in all nine provinces, as well as to map a detailed party political strategy for 2019 and beyond. Black people have been historically disposed, oppressed, dominated and racially marginalized by white supremacy through colonialism and Apartheid. It was through unity and a shared common vision that the working class defeated the Apartheid system. However, more than two decades after it was defeated, the racist Capitalist system has intensified the suffering of the working class. It has ensured wealth and riches for the elite minority, at the expense of the working class majority, and as a result South Africa is one of the most unequal societies in the world. More than half the population lives in abject poverty, caused by high levels of unemployment. We have learned hard lessons that the only way that the working class majority as a whole can be genuinely free and equal, is for us to destroy and dismantle the brutal Capitalist system, and replace it with the humane system of Socialism. At our two-day conference we have resolved to intensify the work of uniting the working class locally and abroad, and to raising the levels of consciousness. The working class must lead and drive an agenda in its own interests. Furthermore, the Interim National Leadership will create a 2019 Elections Commission to organize and prepare us to contest the upcoming elections. The immediate task is to set up for the launching congress which will take place from the 22-24th of March 2019. We depart from our Pre-Launch Conference determined not to fail the workers of the world in our struggle for a Socialist South Africa, Africa and Socialist World. “No thieves, no traitors, no interventionists. This time, the revolution is for real!” Fidel Castro  Issued by Irvin Jim, SRWP National Convener, 15 December 2018