Young, Gifted & Killing It! 2018 in review by Veli Ngubane. In 2018, we continued to go looking for the youngsters who are gifted and killing it in South Africa’s creative industries. African Echo: Where the streets have no nameby Rohan Reddy. One of the best ways to document the truly astonishing rate of change in Africa is through the art of street photography — to be an observer of the streets. By Invitation Only: Help! I’m an ‘adult’ in advertising & I’ve no idea what I’m doingby Shannon Koor. With one year under my belt, here are my observations of the faraway, strange and exciting swamp planet that is the advertising industry. Media Redefined: Behaviour is truthby Martin MacGregor. The biggest challenge any marketing activity has to do is to get consumers to change behaviour. At brief stage, this always feels like an insurmountable obstacle. Yet our behaviour is changing all the time, in strange and unthought of ways. Clicks 'n Tricks: A contract for the webby Charlie Stewart. The web is broken. And its founder, Tim Berners-Lee, wants us all to do our part to fix it. The CX-Files: Winning over Gen Z with AI & CXby Julia Ahlfeldt. If millennials were hard to engage, Gen Zs are even harder. So what, then, can brands do to protect themselves? Regular Reads Brands & Branding: The (post)modern brand as representationMedia Design: Existing While Black, Printed Pages, Simplicissimus, Wat Binne IsMarket Research Wrap: Private labels grab 21% of SA retailSA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Oct 2018 On the Radar Tennis South Africa appoints comms agency#ThisHappened in SA in 2018 — Twitter Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.