PRESIDENT RAMAPHOSA SETS OUT REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICE BEARERS FOR 2018/19 President Cyril Ramaphosa has set out remuneration for all levels of public office bearers for the 2018/19 financial year. While the Commission has recommended an increase of 4% across all categories of public office bearers, President Ramaphosa has determined otherwise. President Ramaphosa’s decision not to follow the Commission’s recommendations is informed by the imperative that the state be considerate, responsive and demonstrate restraint, especially during periods of economic hardship, when determining the level of salary increases for public representatives. The President appreciates that for government to have wider support for its programmes, it must implement and demonstrate through practical actions its commitment to exercising prudence. Accordingly, President Ramaphosa has determined that there will be no annual salary increase for the Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. The salaries and allowances of the Constitutional Court judges and judges of other courts be increased by 2.5 % with effect of 1 April 2018. With regard to Members of Parliament, a 2,5% increase will apply to categories ranging from House Chairperson, Chief Whip: Majority Party, Leader of the Opposition and Whips, to Members of the National Assembly and permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces. In provincial executives, Premiers, Members of Executive Councils and Speakers will not receive a salary increase. Members of provincial legislatures will, however, receive a 2,5% salary increase. Magistrates will benefit from a 4% salary adjustment, as will office bearers in of both national and provincial houses of traditional leaders. Kings and Queens will be eligible for a 2,5% increase. Senior traditional leaders and headmen and women will receive a 4% salary increase. President Ramaphosa has thanked the Independent Commission on the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers and National Treasury for their guidance  in taking the final decision in the matter. The proclamations determining the salaries of the aforementioned categories  of public office bearers will be published in the Government Gazette. Statement issued by Khusela Diko, Spokesperson to the President, 8 December 2018