DA welcomes charges against ANC deployed Tau and Makhubo 10 December 2018 The DA supports City of Johannesburg Executive Mayor, Herman Mashaba, who today laid fraud, corruption, money laundering and racketeering charges against former Johannesburg Mayor Parks Tau and former MMC for Finance, Geoff Makhubo. This sends a strong message to those who use the people’s money to line their pockets while the people suffer. Tau and Makhubo allegedly orchestrated a windfall of at least R30 million for Makhubo by letting him act as a broker for Regiments Fund Managers, which gave them unrestricted access to lucrative contracts within the City. With the help of Makhubo and Tau’s interference, Regiments was allegedly able to facilitate a R290 million loan to Denel while receiving kickbacks of around R3.4 million from the beleaguered parastatal. This matter is being referred to the Zondo Commission by the DA, to form part of the inquiry into the State Capture project which saw billions of rands of the people’s money lost through looting and mismanagement. The DA-led City of Johannesburg has already requested a meeting with newly-appointed National Director of Public Prosecutions, Advocate Shamila Batohi. Now is the time for the National Prosecuting Authority to prove that it is dedicated to speedily prosecuting this case and many others uncovered by the Public Protector, Parliament and the State Capture Inquiry. The DA has also requested a meeting with the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to provide an update on all the charges that have been laid by the DA in this regard, with no commitment received to date. As more evidence of the failing ANC’s part in the State Capture project keeps coming to the fore, South Africans are starting to see the full extent of the ANC’s involvement. We are reminded, daily, of why the ANC and its leader, Cyril Ramaphosa, need to appear before the Zondo Commission to explain their role. A DA government will build One South Africa for All and ensure that the corruption that has been allowed to flourish under the ANC government will end with 15-year jail sentences. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, DA Team One SA Spokesperson on State Capture, 10 December 2018