Cape Town beaches open for ALL to enjoy Note to editors: The following statement was issued by Executive Mayor Dan Plato in response to the recent Clifton beach closure incident. The City of Cape Town is an inclusive city and will always encourage everyone of all demographics to enjoy our public spaces. Our public knows that the City ensures open access to all our public facilities for everyone, and we will not allow any private organisations to limit access to our public spaces. It has become clear over recent days that a security organisation operating at Clifton beach had no authority to ask anyone to leave Clifton beach, that they asked people of all races to leave, and did not single out any race groups. It has also become clear that opportunistic political organisations have ignored this fact to drive a highly divisive and politicised racial agenda. Our beaches will always be open to everyone of all races, locals and visitors alike. Even though some political organisations will exploit any opportunity to drive a racial wedge in our society, this is something we must never allow. I am glad that the public have at least had the opportunity to become more informed about their rights, and that they understand that only authorised law enforcement officials, and not private businesses or members of the public, have any right to ask anyone to leave our beaches. Any person who feels that their rights are in any way being infringed should please immediately call the City of Cape Town’s emergency hotline by dialling 021 480 7700 from a cell phone or 107 toll-free from a landline. I appeal to all our residents and visitors to please enjoy our beaches, to be safe and, where there is any problem, to please immediately report it to us – our law enforcement officials are always close by and will respond with urgency. I will be visiting our beaches over the next week, as I have in recent weeks, to enjoy the sun and the sand with our communities. Our beaches are open to all and we strive to make them a safe space for everyone who visits. Statement issued by Executive Mayor Dan Plato, City of Cape Town, 28 December 2018