DA Gauteng Cabinet Scorecard: Only change will build a better Gauteng 3 December 2018 The province of Gauteng is at a critical juncture. In a few short months, we will have a crucial choice to make. Do we continue down the same failed road of the ANC, or do we venture on an new path and elect a government that will usher in real change that the 14 million residents of this province deserve. It is of the upmost importance that we examine the past four years under the Premiership of David Makhura and his team. My colleagues will break-down in detail the lack of performance by this failing ANC-led provincial government, but before they do so – I have a few points that I must highlight. Since 2014, Premier Makhura has time and time again insisted – when it is strategically convenient, that e-Tolls must go. He has marched, he established a commission – he has said a great many things, but the most important thing that he has not said is to both the Ministers of Transport and Finance – “do not renew the collection contract when it comes to an end”. If he were seriously on the side of the people, he would have used his so-called conviction to stand up to what is evidently wrong. Similarly, under his watch, he has lacked the conviction to act against errant Mayors and officials that have run the municipalities of Emfuleni, Merafong and West Rand District into the ground. These municipalities stand testament to failing ANC governance. Instead of taking action, the Premier shields those who have meted out cruelty to our people. One need look no further than the murderous former Health MEC, Qedani Mahlangu – the architect of the Esidimeni tragedy, allegedly corrupt Brian Hlongwa who bankrupted the Gauteng Health Department and the failed former Mayor of Emfuleni, Simon Mofokeng. These individuals remain members of the party’s provincial decision-making body that will impact policy choices of a failing ANC government. As you can see, delinquency is rewarded in the ranks of the failing ANC. As at the end of the 2017/18 financial year Premier Makhura presided over 124 000 more job losses compared to the end of the previous financial year. At the end of the financial year, Gauteng suffered the most job losses in South Africa. We suffer from a serious backlog in the need for housing, healthcare and schools. We need a better, professionalised police force that will make use of intelligence to bring down the exacerbating rate of crime in this province. We need fewer talk shops and more action. If the failing ANC was serious about ensuring that its citizens have access to adequate water supplies then they should have consistently maintained their water infrastructure. Under the ANC's watch, they have allowed sewage from the Emfuleni Local Municipality to flow into the Vaal River despite being warned that it will have a huge impact on water supply in Gauteng. The raw sewage is causing severe water pollution. The drinking water is now being used to flush pollution out of the Vaal River system and, as a result, we are left with a water shortage and an impending water crisis in this province. This province deserves a government that possesses the political will – the will of the people, to steer us on the right track. Another five years of failing ANC governance will bring about a complete break-down in service delivery and further diminish the quality of life of our people. The ANC has been given too many second chances. In 2019, we have the power to usher in change. The kind of change that will bring forth the real potential of Gauteng. Change that will instill hope and pride in our people. Change that will bring forth a people-centred government. I ask all of you to be a part of change that builds One South Africa for All. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 3 December 2018