Violent NUMSA strike claims its first casualty 6 December 2018 The Democratic Alliance is calling on NUMSA to take responsibility for the loss of life and destruction of property, which has plagued is current industrial action. Other victims of the strike violence have been injured and are on life support, and intimidation is rife. Industrial areas that have been affected by the violence and intimidation include Isando, Spartan, Jet Park, Sebenza and Wadeville. During the past three weeks, 10 attacks have taken place in the area, with more than 20 private vehicles torched and several trucks have been petrol bombed. The police have an obligation and duty to protect life and property and should be enforcing the law and arresting every individual who breaks the law. A security guard has died from severe burns, another is on life support in ICU and another individual has had to have a finger amputated. Yet the South African Police Service (SAPS) has yet to make any arrests in connection with these crimes. We once again call for an honest and professional police service that is well-trained and well-resourced to adequately. This violent activity and senseless loss of life cannot go unpunished. It is unacceptable that innocent individuals are murdered and hospitalised and trucks petrol bombed with no consequences. Our condolences go out to the family of the bereaved. The Labour Relations Act allows for peaceful picketing, not violent picketing. In addition, Common Law provides for, vicarious liability, which allows union bosses to be held accountable if their members commit crimes while picketing. NUMSA bosses have failed to condemn the murder, violence, intimidation and destruction of property nor have they insisted that their members abide by the law. The strike and mayhem is spreading, while the police appear to be powerless. With almost 10 000 000 South Africans unemployed we can ill afford these attacks on businesses, which is a deterrent to further investment in our country and contributes to unemployment. Minister Bheki Cele cannot sit on his hands while scenes resembling a warzone unfold. As the political head of the SAPS, he needs to show leadership. Issued by Michael Waters, Deputy Chief Whip and Lethabong Constituency Head, 6 December 2018