DA’s high marks for Lesufi demonstrate the party’s disregard for Afrikaans 7 December 2018 The harder Panyaza Lesufi fights against Afrikaans, the more marks the controversial Gauteng MEC for Education scores with the DA. The DA's premier candidate in Gauteng, Solly Msimanga, basically awarded Lesufi a distinction by giving him 75%. This follows after the DA 'rewarded' him with 60% in 2016 and 70% in 2017. According to media reports, Msimanga was laying it on thick when he praised Lesufi's 'virtues'. Msimanga said that Lesufi has a clear vision of where he is going with the Gauteng Department of Education and that he is playing an 'important role' in 'modernising' education in Gauteng. The FF Plus finds all this shocking given Lesufi's blatant hostility towards Afrikaans and Afrikaans schools in Gauteng and views it as a slap in the face of all Afrikaans-speaking people in Gauteng. White and Coloured Afrikaans-speaking people must take note of the fact that the DA is supporting Lesufi. This goes to show how important it is that voters support a party that really fights for their rights and that voters must not just vote for one of the larger opposition parties that share the ANC's sentiments on certain matters. The FF Plus is the only party that stands up for the Afrikaans community in Gauteng as well as in the rest of the country. The problems at High School Overvaal earlier this year was Lesufi's doing and prompted the FF Plus to table a Private Member’s Bill aimed at prohibiting protest actions and marches within 500 m of schools and other institutions where minors are present. The Bill has already been published in the Government Gazette and was tabled for discussion in Parliament's Portfolio Committee for Police last month. The FF Plus, currently the third largest party in Gauteng, will be one of the opposition partners when a new coalition government is formed in the province and voters will surely benefit if they strengthen the hand of a party that is committed to protecting their rights. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson, 7 December 2018