DA lays criminal charges against EFF 3 December 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Limpopo has today added additional criminal charges against the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) under case number 29/12/18 at the Polokwane police station. The DA added charges of malicious damage to property to the EFF hooligans that vandalised a Vodacom store at Mall of the North yesterday, causing damage estimated at R500 000. We also added accessory to a crime charges for the owner of the vehicle used in this violent attack. This violent attack on the store comes in protest to an image of Julius Malema and Floyd Shivambu captioned “abusers of democracy” by a keynote speaker at the Vodacom journalist of the year awards. This deplorable act is another example of EFF tactics to resort to violence when they do not get their way, in this case it led to the damage of property and could have led to the injury of innocent bystanders or unassuming shoppers. The EFF have continuously proven to be violent and destructive constitutional delinquents that have abused the right to freedom of expression as set out in section 16 of the constitution. This recent attack on Vodacom for a view expressed by a keynote speaker and not the company itself is an attack on our democratic rights and is meant to intimidate anyone who dares stand up to the bullying of the EFF. Despite the South African Police Service (SAPS) having the car used to transport the hooligans in custody and the details of the car owner, no arrests have been made. We demand that arrests be made in this case. The DA believes in a constitutional democracy where everyone has the right to express themselves without the threat of victimisation and there is space for the disagreement of opinions. The DA will continue to monitor any developments around this case to ensure the culprits are held accountable. Only the DA is actively working to unite South Africans by building One South Africa for All. Issued by Jacques Smalle, DA Limpopo Premier Candidate, 3 December 2018