Operation Phakisa takes over from Operaion Corana 18 December 2018 Operation Phakisa continues its fight against poaching of marine resources with the redeployment of its team to the Overberg Region in early December 2018.  Members from the South African Police Service (SAPS), Department of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) and Cape Nature took up the reigns of Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring in the Overberg Region for 16 days with notable success. In a continuation of the positive impact of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) Operation Corona, Operation Phakisa maintained a presence with high visibility operations from 29 November to 14 December 2018, and contributed significantly to the decline in poaching activities.  In addition to keeping poachers out of the water, abalone to the value of R1 161 890, West Coast Rock Lobster to the value of R12 500 and associated equipment to the value of R194 460, was confiscated. During the period of deployment 20 suspects were also arrested. The long hours worked, with a 24-hour presence by a small force of dedicated officials is indicative of Operation Phakisa’s Initiative 5 resolve to have an impact on the scourge of poaching, to take back control of South Africa’s marine resources for future generations and enhance the development of the Ocean Economy. Focusing and aligning the different law enforcement operations is enabling government to prioritise specific areas for maximum impact while the different capabilities of different departments act as force multipliers. Just in the first six months of 2018/19 financial year the operations conducted through Operation Phakisa Initiative 5: Enhanced and Co-ordinated Compliance and Enforcement resulted in confiscations to the value of R19 801 249.00 compared to R1 664 870 for the same period in 2017. Multiple institutions involved in law enforcement participate in Operation Phakisa supported by NATJOINTS, through joint proactive and reactive operations in the maritime environment cutting across all the different jurisdictions. Searches, visits and operational activity have increased significantly, projecting a visible government presence in the coastal regions. Issued by Zolile Nqayi on behalf of Dept of Environmental Affairs, 18 December 2018