ANC demands Western Cape Legislature calls a special meeting to discuss Premier Zille 20 December 2018 The ANC is demanding that Speaker Sharna Fernandez convenes a special session of the Western Cape Legislature before the State of the Province Address to discuss a damning finding by the Public Protector against Premier Helen Zille. “We also demand that DA leader Mmusi Maimane show some leadership and backbone and also illustrate he’s not beholden to the Premier by acting against Zille. If this were Patricia de Lille he would have acted within minutes after Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane issued her report on Wednesday,” said Faiez Jacobs, ANC Western Cape secretary. In her report into an ANC complaint against Premier Zille, Public Protector Mkhwebane found that Zille had directly or indirectly influenced the procurement of her son, Paul Maree’s company’s services. Mkhwebane also accused Zille of maladministration and abuse of power. Jacobs said: “These are serious findings. Zille has been acting like the dictator of Wale Street for far too long. We demand that the Speaker stop protecting Helen Zille, as she did with another Public Protector report, and table this one as directed. “Speaker Fernandez has 30 days to comply with the Public Protector’s directive. We demand that Zille be held accountable by the Legislature and that appropriate action is taken against her. Fernandez must call a special session before the State of the Province Address.” Jacobs also implored President Cyril Ramaphosa to submit Mkhwebane’s report to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Thandi Modise, for action. In her report released on Wednesday, the Public Protector also directed President Ramaphosa that within 14 days after having received her document, and once having read it, to submit it with his recommendations to the NCOP Chairperson. Jacobs said: “This is essential reading matter for the President. We look forward to his recommendations.” According to Public Protector Mkhwebane’s report, said Jacobs, the NCOP would have 30 days after having received President Ramaphosa’s recommendations to act against Zille. Issued by Faiez Jacobs, ANC Western Cape secretary, 20 December 2018