FF Plus Youth launches SATalent: a unique programme to help young people find a job 10 December 2018 The FF Plus now has a unique programme to help unemployed youths look for a job in a labour market where the doors frequently slam shut in the faces of white youths in South Africa. The name of the programme is SATalent. (Link to webpage: https://www.slaanterugsa.org.za/wat-is-satalent/ ) The development of SATalent was necessitated by the growing problem of unemployment among white and coloured youths in South Africa and the fact that black people enjoy preference in the labour market in terms of policies like Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) and Affirmative Action (AA). The degree to which white youths in particular are being excluded from the labour market is clearly evident in President Cyril Ramaphosa's race-based initiative aimed at addressing the problem of unemployment among South African youths, i.e. the Youth Employment Service (YES). White youths were unable to participate in the initiative as registration was closed for white jobseekers. Only after the FF Plus undertook to do something about the matter, was the programme changed and now the names of white youths are made available to prospective employers, but these white youths still cannot register fully. Yes4Youth is nothing but blatant racial discrimination and thus it violates our country's Constitution. The FF Plus has already lodged a complaint with the Human Rights Commission (HRC) regarding the matter. In contrast to the Yes4Youth initiative, the FF Plus Youth wants to use SATalent to offer all unemployed people the opportunity to register for its programme (please see fact sheet below). With SATalent, the FF Plus shows that the party will not hesitate to fight back against the inequalities created by the ANC government. The time has come for white youths in particular to take back their future and demand equal opportunities. SATalent is one of the ways in which the FF Plus will ensure that everyone enjoys the same rights. The Yes4Youth programme and Ramaphosa's exclusion of a minority group based on their race creates the impression that South Africa does not really belong to all who live in it. It comes down to unfair discrimination, specifically towards the Born Free Generation who was born after 1994 and thus cannot be held responsible for any inequality in South Africa – something that the ANC government surely contributed to greatly. We will not allow the government to determine our identity or exclude minority groups by means of racially obsessed policies and programmes. Fact sheet: What is SATalent? Due to the economic crisis in South Africa, unemployment is a reality that affects us all. SATalent creates a platform where unemployed youths can register and be connected with businesses that are looking for people with specific skills. SATalent will also aim to connect unemployed people who have specific skills, qualifications and experience with state departments and local authorities that have applicable vacancies. SATalent fights back against discriminatory practices in the labour market and advocates equal opportunities for all. How does SATalent work? SATalent is a platform where unemployed South Africans can connect with prospective employers. Jobseekers only need to complete the electronic questionnaire in order to register. Businesses also have the opportunity to get involved in the initiative by providing their details. Who can register? Any and all jobseekers are welcome to complete the registration form. The objective is to ensure equal opportunities for all and SATalent holds the view that the best candidate for the relevant position must be appointed, irrespective of the person's race. Employers can contact SATalent for more information on CV's and registration. Issued by Tammy Wessels, FF Plus Youth Leader, 10 December 2018