ANC urges Zille to admit she is wrong and to not waste taxpayers’ money on an appeal 19 December 2018 The ANC in the Western Cape has urged Premier Helen Zille to admit she was wrong in offering assistance to a workshop programme, which had involved her son. The ANC also urged Premier Zille not to waste taxpayers’ money by appealing against Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s finding on the matter, which was first referred to her for investigation by ANC Member of the Western Cape Legislature Cameron Dugmore. Dugmore had alleged Zille broke the Western Cape provincial government's Code of Ethics by influencing officials to allow her son, Paul Maree, access to tablets purchased by the Western Cape Education Department. Although the project had benefited many pupils, the Public Protector found that the Premier had "exposed herself to a risk of a conflict of interest between her official responsibilities and her private interests". She said: “So section 136(2) of the Constitution requires the Premier not to expose herself to any situation involving the risk of a conflict between her official responsibilities and her private interests. So in this instance she violated the Constitution, especially the Executive Members Ethics Act." Jacobs said: “We welcome this finding. It’s a clear demonstration of the patronage network that flourishes within the DA, this time involving the Premier herself.” It was clear that no other service provider was given an opportunity to load their educational software onto government procured laptops. “But Helen Zille’s son was, thus giving his company, Paper Video, an unfair advantage,” Jacobs said. This was a breach of the constitutional requirement that procurement should happen in a fair and transparent manner. “Zille must admit that she is wrong and not waste taxpayers’ money by taking this finding on review. There are many more instances of patronage, corruption, nepotism in the ranks of the DA and which will be exposed over the next few months. “We know that this provincial government, City of Cape Town and many other DA-run municipalities can never claim to be the best-run governments. Their dismal record of service delivery, neglect of the poor, along with corruption, nepotism, racism and patronage are there for all to see.” Issued by Dennis Cruywagen on behalf of Faiez Jacobs, ANC WC secretary, 19 December 2018