DA responds to ANC allegations in Tshwane 3 December 2018 What is clear to us, is that the failing ANC is desperately trying to salvage its position in Tshwane. We are not hoodwinked by this because they have suffered extraordinary reputational damage in recent times through the VBS revelations, the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into Corruption and State Capture and other issues such as Life Esidimeni and e-Tolls. So they clearly decided that their best form of defence is to strike out and attack even on the basis of fake news. The City of Tshwane is not on the verge of collapse and we will allow our colleagues in the City of Tshwane to address that. However, what is clear is that the GladAfrica contract was irregular and the City Manager was at the heart of an appointment that looks corrupt. It is ironic that the very person who is leading the charge against this corruption, namely Mayor Solly Msimanga, is being accused. Yet, on Thursday, we witnessed the very same failing ANC and its partners in the Coalition of Corruption block an investigation and a possible suspension. The failing ANC claim to be the ones that exposed GladAfrica. This is not true. In fact, they are “mafikizolos” because they only took action after Mayor Solly Msimanga pursued allegations made by a whistle-blower. The Democratic Alliance (DA) also notes the failing ANC’s allegations of a racist WhatsApp conversation that took place between two members of the DA. The members involved in this matter have sworn that this text has been fabricated. As a demonstration of their desire to have this proven, they have voluntarily asked that their devices undergo a forensic investigation. It is clear that the deparate ANC wants to peddle lies that have no basis, in an attempt to muddy the waters in Tshwane. Any form of racism, on any platform, goes against the DA’s values of Freedom, Fairness, Opportunity and Diversity, and what we stand for as Public Representatives. We will not allow racism, in any form, to undermine the project of nation-building and reconciliation that our nation committed to in 1994. The DA remains committed to building a non-racial society and One South Africa for All. Indeed, if the Whatsapp screen grabs are proven to be fake, it then implies a further investigation as to who would be responsible will ensue. It is perplexing that the failing ANC continues to try to obstruct the great work which Mayor Solly Msimanga and his team are doing in Tshwane. Thus far, we have created 16 125 jobs and have revised the EPWP work programme to ensure that all residents have fair, and equal access to job opportunities. To date, we have registered 120 000 people on this new lottery-based system. We will continue to ensure that the residents of Tshwane come first, and that nothing, not even a Coalition of Corruption, can hamper the progress we are making in this regard. Issued by Mike Moriarty, DA Gauteng Provincial Chairperson, 3 December 2018