Bosasa denies contract exists with Ramaphosa Jr, despite President’s confirmation Despite President Cyril Ramaphosa telling Parliament last month that he had personally seen the business contract between Bosasa (now African Global Operations) and his son, Andile, the embattled company has stated in writing that such a contract doesn’t exist. In their reply (attached here) to my PAIA application for access to this contract, the company’s chairman, Mr Gumede, states that “there exists no record that fits the description.” The chairman then goes on to contradict himself by saying that “African Global declines to furnish this record as the record is not required by you for the exercise or protection of any right”. In essence, this is a blanket refusal for access to any and all contracts the company has with Andile Ramaphosa. Bosasa and the Ramaphosa’s are hiding something, and we will get to the bottom of it. I have therefore asked our legal team to advise on what recourse is available in such circumstances. We will not relent in this fight to shine light on what has all the makings of ANC-style collusion, nepotism and corruption.There appears to be a triangle of corruption in place, and it is this very system of corruption that locks millions of South Africans out of opportunity.The fact that Bosasa gave a R500 000 “donation” to Cyril Ramaphosa’s election campaign to become ANC President while the company does business with his son and receives billions of rands in lucrative tenders from government cannot be ignored. It has been 14 days since I called on President Ramaphosa to immediately appoint a full-scale independent inquiry - headed by a retired judge to be selected by the Chief Justice - to fully investigate the Bosasa scandal, which now involves the President and his family. The President should do so without delay. Ramaphosa is not the only one to have benefited from Bosasa. A long list of ANC ministers and other cadres of the party have received extensive security upgrades like CCTV cameras, alarm systems and electric fencing free of charge from Bosasa. This list includes Gwede Mantashe, Nomvula Mokonyane, Thabang Makwetla, Dudu Myeni, Linda Mti, Mbulelo Gingcana and Vincent Smith. The company also allegedly funded former President Jacob Zuma’s birthday bashes in 2015 and 2016, to the estimated value of R3.5 million. We cannot have double standards when it comes to bribery and corruption – particularly not when it involves the highest office of the country. The President’s links to Bosasa – including all payments made to him, to the ANC and to his son, whether directly or through shell companies, third parties or trust accounts – must be investigated in detail The ANC's system of corruption steals opportunity from ordinary South Africans and needs to be eradicated in its entirety. The DA has shown that by building capable and corrupt-free governments, jobs are created, inclusive economic growth is achieved, and services are delivered to all. Statement issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 9 December 2018