No one like Dimitri Tsafendas acted in a more radical and direct way against apartheid, and very few people paid such a high price for an act of rebellion against the racist regime. On September 6 1966, while he was working as a parliament’s messenger, Tsafendas stabbed to death prime minister Hendrik Verwoerd. He did it just before Verwoerd was due to give a speech in parliament and in front of numerous MPs and officials. He had no way to escape, but that did not matter to the assassin: it was, or so he thought, the only chance he would have to kill Verwoerd, and he was willing to bear the consequences. In addition to being the highest authority of the regime, the then prime minister was the promoter and main advocate of the racial segregation system that condemned blacks to be third-class citizens. Nobody like him embodied the supremacist South Africa: if someone wanted to do something against apartheid and had only one bullet, the objective had to be Verwoerd. Despite all this, the name of Dimitri Tsafendas does not appear on any list of illustrious, admired or hated, South Africans, and is absent from all the mausoleums that have been erected to the liberators of black South Africa since apartheid was dissolved at the beginning of the 1990s. Now, a book published by Jacana comes to correct this injustice, at least partially. It is written by Harris Dousemetzis and is the result of an exhaustive investigation of 9 years, which achieves with impressive precision what seemed impossible: to reconstruct in great detail the life of an apparently mysterious man of which almost nobody knew anything. Apart from his status as a foreigner and declassed, which perhaps contributed to no one vindicating him, the first explanation of this public irrelevance seems to be the way the National Party government of the time dealt with the assassination. Dousemetzis shows how despite the fact that most of the witnesses who knew Tsafendas didn’t seem to have noted anything wrong with his mental state, the South African authorities declared him insane and unfit to face trial. Their goal was to discredit Tsafendas and prevent him from becoming a political hero, but also to hide the embarrassing reality: that an agitator and consummate militant with police files in various countries because of his revolutionary tendencies could get a job in parliament and kill the most important man of the regime at the very center of South Africa’s political power. Besides unveiling the successful cover-up, which also wanted to prevent Tsafendas’ action to ignite the flame of a rebellion, the author's research introduces us to a generous, sensitive and intelligent man, whose desire for justice and curiosity turned him into an errant adventurer that lived in many countries and spoke several languages. The son of a Greek father and a Mozambican mixed-race mother, Tsafendas was born in Mozambique and raised in Egypt, from where he returned to the then Portuguese colony to end up emigrating to South Africa. His association with the communists and the vehemence with which he expressed his rejection of racism and colonialism made him an enemy of the Portuguese and South African authorities. Tsafendas had to go into exile, and began in Canada and the United States a long and eventful journey that took him to Portugal, Greece, England, Germany, Egypt and Turkey. During these years, in which he did not stop longing to return to Mozambique and South Africa, Tsafendas joined the communist side in the Greek civil war, got to know of torture in the dungeons of Salazar's Portugal and did a lot of jobs, among them teaching English to children in Istanbul. After several failed attempts, Tsafendas managed in 1963 to access South Africa again, despite being still prohibited to enter the country. Both in Africa and in the rest of the countries he travelled to, the people who met him speak of a sociable and passionate man, always fraternal with the like-minded people he encountered and incapable of refraining from voicing his political opinions or remaining silent in the face of injustice, often at the expense of his most urgent interests. Dousemetzis and the book’s co-author, Gerry Loughran, recreate plenty of anecdotes with a surprising level of concretion, taking into account that the facts occurred in different places and long time ago. One reads their book constantly looking up the footnotes, that never disappoint and always offer a reliable source: a police or medical report, an interview with a witness or with the people Tsafendas told about his life in his last years. Tsafendas’ alleged mental problems saved him from the trial and the gallows, but not from 28 years in prison. For most of that time he was kept in isolation in the death row section of Pretoria Central prison, where he was brutally tortured in regular basis and could hear the trapdoors sliding and the screams of fear of those about to be executed. Only after the change of regime in 1994 was he transferred to the psychiatric institution he should have been sent to from the beginning after being declared unfit to stand trial because of his mental state. Some of his friends tried to get him out of the mental institution so Tsafendas could die a free man and smell and see the ocean that he missed so much since his incarceration, but the lack of political will and his family’s refusal to take care of the old man condemned him to die locked up in 1999, at the age of 81. Until the end, Tsafendas justified having killed a “tyrant” and unjust ruler as Verwoerd as a moral action. He never showed any interest in how he would be remembered, so he probably wouldn’t have cared about the fact that he was to pay even after his death the consequences of the assassination. Both the Greek community and the Greek Orthodox Church in South Africa tried by all means to avoid Tsafendas being given an Orthodox funeral. Besides offering some warm descriptions of the Greek communities in some of the places he lived, the book exposes the meanness that often characterised the treatment towards Tsafendas of the Hellenic communities in Mozambique and South Africa, too concerned about their good name and their businesses to allow the man to have a decent funeral even after the end of apartheid. The man who killed apartheid has a title more commercial than rigorous, because apartheid survived Verwoerd almost thirty years. But it is a definitive investigation and does justice to a lucid and courageous man, in which the desire for freedom and justice always prevailed over the instinct of conservation and the yearning for security.