STATEMENT: 2018 FW DE KLERK GOODWILL AWARD The  Board of Trustees of the FW de Klerk Foundation is awarding the 2018 FW de Klerk Goodwill Award to Gift of the Givers, whose efforts “…actively seek to build bridges between people of different cultures and religions, engendering goodwill, harmonious coexistence, tolerance and mutual respect…” The Board decided to present the Goodwill Award to Gift of the Givers - the largest disaster response NGO of African origin on the African continent - in recognition of their exceptional, life-changing, life-saving work. Established in 1992, the organisation today has 21 categories of projects, which cover areas such as health, education, agricultural sustainability, life skills, job creation and entrepreneurship, feeding schemes, sport and culture and winter warmth. Working for the benefit of all in South Africa - and beyond our borders - their ethos is very much in keeping with the founding provisions of our Constitution, which enshrine the values of “human dignity, the achievement of equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms…” Over their almost 26 year history, Gift of the Givers have disbursed R2.1 billion in aid to needy individuals and communities in 43 countries, South Africa included. Among other interventions, they have been involved in drought relief in the Western Cape since October 2015. Their motto is: “Best Among People are those who Benefit Mankind”. Accordingly, Gift of the Givers serves all people irrespective of race, religion, culture, colour, political affiliation or geographical location, unconditionally. Former President FW de Klerk presented the Goodwill Award to Dr Imtiaz Sooliman - Founder, Director and Chairman of Gift of the Givers - at the Foundation’s Annual Gala Dinner in Cape Town on Thursday, 1 February 2018. The FW de Klerk Goodwill Award was established in 2010 to give recognition to individuals and organisations that have made extraordinary contributions to the promotion of goodwill between South Africans. Past winners include Pieter-Dirk Uys (2012), Studietrust (2013), Patrice Motsepe (2014), Afrika Tikkun (2015), Adv Thuli Madonsela and the Office of the Public Protector (2016), and the coach and athlete team of Mrs Anna (Ans) Botha, and Mr Wayde van Niekerk (2017). Issued by the FW de Klerk Foundation, 2 February 2018