ANCWL statement on the continuing smear campaigns against the Public Protector by Democratic Alliance 19 February 2018 The African National Congress Women's League (ANCWL) has noted that the Israel cheer leaders- Democratic Alliance (DA) is intensifying it's smear campaigns tactics against the Public Protector Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane. DA never appreciated the fact that Advocate Mkhwebane was  supported by the majority of Members of Parliament (MP's) during the interviews for public protector position. DA MP's hiding under the parliamentary privilege and immunity accused Advocate Mkhwebane of being a former spy and some within the DA, including Pastor Maimane are continously using every platform in parliament to tarnish the image of the Public Protector. The DA's call that Advocate Mkhwebane must be removed after the Court ruled that ABSA must not pay back the money received from South African Reserve Bank (SARB) is nothing but to ensure that the Court ruling is not appealed. The Public Protector has a right to appeal or not appeal the Court ruling on CIEX -ABSA report. The DA projects itself as defenders of democracy, but however their interpretation of democracy is that all crimes of looting State resources and killing of black people committed under apartheid government which its last President was FW De Klerk must be left unchallenged. It is not surprising that the DA stands firm in support of CIEX-ABSA court ruling and is also against nationalisation of land expropriation without compensation and nationalisation of SARB. It seems for the DA, the beneficiaries of unjust laws of colonialism and apartheid are more valuable than victims of those atrocious systems. The Public Protector has endured enormous attacks from the arrogant defenders of colonialism and apartheid laws and she has to be defended by all progressive South Africans.  If Public Protector has a case to answer she must be taken through lawful processes to answer her case, not through courts of public opinion presided over by DA. The Public Protector is answerable to the Constitution and administratively accountable to the Parliament and not to the DA as a political party. The DA exists solely to defend and entrench white supremacy. They embrace black members who can succumb to arrogance of DA white caucus and they push those black members out the day they revolt against the white master tendencies. For the DA, a united, non-racial and prosperous South Africa means ownership of land and economy must remain in the hands of the minority. In solidarity with the landless masses that the DA wishes that they remain landless and economic destitute, all political parties that have put DA into power in various Municipalities in the country must show their commitment in fighting white arrogance and dismantling unjust legacies of colonialism and apartheid by removing the DA from governing in those Municipalities. The ANCWL calls all progressive political parties, civil society organisations and individuals to condemn the smear campaign of DA against  the Public Protector. Issued by Meokgo Matuba, ANCWL Secretary General, 19 February 2018