Statement of ANC Musa Dladla Region of the Recall of President Jacob Zuma 20 February 2018 The African National Congress Musa Dladla Region welcomes the decision of the ANC NEC to recall President Jacob Zuma. We also welcome his voluntary resignation in the highest office of the country. President Zuma’s resignation epitomize high discipline on his part and adherence to the decisions of the National Executive Committee (NEC). As the Region, we held a consultative meeting yesterday at eMpangeni Town Hall, where ANC’s Branch Chairpersons and Secretaries, Leagues of the ANC and ANC councilors were in attendance when the NEC member Comrade Khensani Kubayi – Ngubane, addressed the gathering on the recent developments in our organization. As Musa Dladla Region, we have 105 branches and we are the second biggest region in terms of branches in KwaZulu-Natal and we are proudly home to President Zuma and other ANC leaders this region has produced. Our branches however did raise some strong concerns about the manner in which the transition in the organization was handled as well a divisive articulations by some few NEC members which are contrary to the unity we are advocating to achieve as the ANC in all levels. We wish to thank the people of South Africa for the continuous support to president Zuma. President Zuma served the country with distinction and as a home Region of President Zuma we wish to thank him for the continued support his foundation gave to the people of Nkandla during the festive season and we are hopeful that he will continue serving our poor people until his last breath. We wish to salute the outstanding contribution of President Zuma who achieved many of the objectives and goals of the African National Congress and the government of the people of South Africa at Large, here are some of the achievements during the tenure of President Jacob Zuma. - President Zuma established the Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation and the National Planning Commission, which produced the National Development Plan(NDP) Vision 2030 - Splitting of Department of Education into two (Department of Higher Education and Training and Department of Basic Education) - Two universities were built (University of Mpumalanga and Sol Plaatje University in the Northern Cape) - Expanded Public Works Programs- Since 2014 the EPWP created more than two million work opportunities towards the attainment of the target of 6 million work opportunities by the end of March 2019. - Free Education - National Infrastructure Plan - Life expectancy has increased from 58,8% to 64,3% - Basic Services – The percentage of households connected to the electricity supply increased from 77,1 % to 84,2 %. - Households that use electricity for cooking increased from 58,0% to 76,8%. - Households with access to improved sanitation increased from 62,3% to 80,9% - Social Grants : to fight poverty, President Zuma’s administration  provided social assistance to over 7 million poor South Africans through various social grants. - Land Reform and Ownership – the administration of President Zuma prioritized the land question in South Africa with a particular focus on land reform and ownership and land by the poor majority citizens who were disposed during apartheid and colonialism. We will campaign for a decisive victory of the African National Congress for the 2019 General Elections, we know president Zuma as a cadre of the movement he will join us on the ground and we mobilize ordinary South Africans to vote for the African National Congress. We therefore strongly urge all ANC members and South Africans, to go out in numbers to campaign and vote for the glorious movement in the forthcoming elections as this is the only way to take our country forward and to embrace the Year of President Nelson Mandela: 100 Year of Renewal, Unity and Jobs. As the leadership of the region, we are reminding all our members and all citizens to check their addresses with the IEC, verify their addresses and register in order to be eligible to vote on the Voter Registration Weekend: 10 and 11 March 2018. As the Region, Province, Country and the Continent at large, we shall continue to draw from the wisdom of Cde President Jacob Zuma as one of the stalwarts of our glorious movement. Issued by Zama Mncwabe on behalf of ANC Musa Dladla, 20 February 2018