We salute you President Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma! Black First Land First (BLF) regards the former president of the Republic of South Africa, Comrade Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, as a hero of the oppressed people of our country. Comrade Zuma chose the difficult path of revolution against the historic and very powerful enemies of his people. Zuma was correct to focus the minds of the nation on white monopoly capital as the primary enemy of black liberation. The enemy knew that if Zuma’s mobilization around Radical Economic Transformation (RET) could gain sufficient momentum, it would be the end of white rule in our country. So the enemy struck back viciously. Former President Zuma put up a brave fight. He energized and radicalized large sections of the ruling party, the African National Congress (ANC). He led from the front with his historic call for land expropriation without compensation. He infused the spirit of radical managerial decisions within the State Owned Enterprises (SOEs). His leadership made it possible to speak about 90% local content in cultural productions. It is Former President Zuma’s demeanour that strengthened the spine of the then Eskom leadership to demand 51% black ownership in procurement. The white world got a fright and decided that Zuma must go. BLF has never said that Zuma was a saint. We have always said, and we maintain, that Zuma had become a radicalizing force and therefore, a revolutionary. Comrade Zuma had already abandoned the West and was looking East. The West sought amongst our own those who would be willing to fight Zuma to end the march towards radical economic freedom. The West poured money and promises of greatness to those willing to do its dirty work. The enemies of black liberation unleashed the biggest propaganda war we have ever seen. They demonized Comrade Zuma and turned him into the most corrupt person on planet earth. They cleaned their corrupt agents through mass media deception. Many of our people fell victim to this propaganda. We have been made to hate the one who had our backs covered. But, it was not for the first time. The method had not so long ago worked in Libya. It is said that some people in Ghana celebrated when the CIA toppled Kwame Nkrumah. The traitors of the African revolution inside the ruling party made common cause with agents of imperialism who had been frequenting London to get instructions and British pounds. The ANC elective conference was bought to murder the dream of Radical Economic Transformation (RET). All that was left was a parliamentary coup to give legitimacy to the agenda of white monopoly capital. You, Nxamalala, stood on the solid ground of revolutionary principles. BLF has learned a lot from your deep knowledge of revolutionary warfare. If you were not such a master of revolutionary tactics, they would have long cut your road short. You fought long enough to leave a discernable legacy. We thank you Msholozi for free education. But most importantly, we thank you for the idea whose time has come – Radical Economic Transformation. As the best of revolutionary leaders taught us, from Karl Marx to Steve Biko and beyond, we know the enemy might even exterminate our physical bodies, but they can’t kill an idea whose time has come. Now is the time for Radical Economic Transformation! Now is the time to end the suffering of our people. Msholozi, BLF shall honour your gallant fight by taking the struggle for Radical Economic Transformation to even higher levels. We will not waste time with the ANC leaders who have sold their souls for 30 pieces of silver. There is no time to waste. There is no time to mourn and agonize. It’s time to organize and keep the fight for Radical Economic Transformation alive. Those who got rid of Comrade Zuma did so to murder Radical Economic Transformation. They cannot be expected to carry out the same programme with fidelity and the required determination. The dream of Radical Economic Transformation shall rise like the unstoppable Tsunami that Msholozi had become. BLF thanks Msholozi for the gift of Radical Economic Transformation. It’s our commitment to never betray you Msholozi. The land shall return to its rightful owners. The diamonds, gold, platinum and many other precious minerals shall too be in the possession of the people. We shall defend free education. We shall defend the BRICS programme. We shall defend the judicial commission of inquiry into state capture. BLF shall continue to defend black dignity through reclaiming our country. Long live Nxamalala! Statement issued by the National Coordinating Committee of the Black First Land First Movement (BLF NCC), 15 February 2018