National Commissioner Khehla Sitole condemns attack on Ngcobo Police Station 21 Feb 2018 The National Commissioner of the South African Police Service, General Khehla John Sitole,has strongly condemned the attack on the Ngcobo Police Station between Umtata and Queenstown in the Eastern Cape. An unknown group of armed suspects entered the police station in the early hours of this morning and without warning, randomly opened fire on the members on duty. Three members were killed instantly in the Community Service Centre. An off duty soldier was also shot dead as the suspects were fleeing. The suspects made off with a police van taking two other members. The bodies of both these members with gunshot wounds were later found along the roadside, six kilometers from the police station. According to preliminary investigations, it appears that members were shot execution style. This callous and cold-blooded attack has been condemned in the strongest possible way by the National Commissioner. "I am appalled and deeply saddened by the cold and callous attack on our colleagues this morning," said General Sitole. "I have activated a task team comprising of experienced detectives of the South African Police Service and the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation to investigate this attack," said General Sitole. This team will be supported by specialized medium to high risk teams with the added support of the Airwing. "We will not rest until we have tracked down these heartless killers and bring them to book", added General Sitole. The National Commissioner has also called upon the community to assist with any information that could help identify and bring these perpetrators to book as this is a heartless attack on the State. While the motive for this attack is not clear yet we have established that the suspects have a robbed an ATM a short distance away from the police station, stolen 10 firearms as well as a police van from the station. Information can be communicated to the SAPS Crime Stop number 086 00 10111. Callers may remain anonymous and all information will be treated in the strictest of confidence. Statement issued by Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo, South African Police Service, 21 February 2018 *** Minister Fikile Mbalula condemns killing of five Police officers from Ngcobo Police station 21 Feb 2018 The Minister of Police, Minister Fikile Mbalula today woke up to the most horrifying news, five (5) Police from Engcobo, Eastern Cape were attacked at Engcobo Police station. A group of armed suspects entered the police station in the early hours of this morning. Three members were killed instantly, the suspects made off with a police van taking two other members. The two police officers were later found dead with gunshot wounds. Today Minister Fikile Mbalula will be visiting Engcobo, Eastern Cape. “I call for calm from our members, as I am aware how emotional this horrific incident is. Today I have instructed General Khehla Sitole to hunt those barbaric criminals and bring them to book. They must regret the day they sat and planned to attack the state.” Mbalula said. While the motive is not yet clear, the suspects has stolen firearms from the Police station. “These are very dangerous criminals, I urge people to remain vigilant and calm and report any possible suspicion to the Police,” Mbalula added. This act further adds the number of guns in the wrong hands and reversing the hard work the Police have been doing to clean our streets of illegal firearms and keeping our country safe. The task team has been activated comprising of experienced detectives and DPCI (Hawks). Statement issued by Ministry of Police, 21 February 2018