EXCLUSIVE: Management shakeup at Publicis Groupe Africa, agencies by Herman Manson. With Kevin Tromp having left, Publicis Groupe Africa and a number of its agencies have undergone significant management changes. #AgencyLeaders2017: Most admired ad agency boss in Cape Townby Herman Manson. It's time for the 2017 MarkLives Agency Leaders' Most Admired Poll results! Today we reveal which agency leaders were most admired by their peers in Cape Town during 2017. By Invitation Only: Letter to the South African advertising industry — part 2by Khethiwe Makhubo. In this letter, I am choosing to speak out about some painful experiences and stories that demonstrate how this industry really is to the black female body, voice and narrative. Big Q 2018 Expectations:- #BigQ2018: Velocity of change going to be unprecedented & unpredictable —Prakash Patel- #BigQ2018: Strained budgets, profit margins to impact in various ways — Xola Nouse- #BigQ2018: World of marketing & advertising a sea of complexity — Tara Turkington & Tiffany Turkington-Palmer - #BigQ2018: Security at forefront of consumers’ minds — Wynand Smit Cover Stories: Top 5 intl mag covers for 2017 — nicheby Shane de Lange. My 2017 Top 5 list for international niche and independent publications has been selected for their overall cultural impact, with hints of revivalism and reformism while remaining contemporary and relevant. Regular Reads: - Shelf Life: Star Zoo Factory offers new platform for artists- SA TV Ratings: SABC 2 — primetime top 20 for Dec, Nov 2017 On the Radar: - Creative Circle monthly award winners Q4 2017- House of Brave's empowerment deal, senior appointments- New-look Loeries 2018 opens for entries- Alex Jay to join Jacaranda FM- #Campaigns: Volkswagen Polo drops new ad- New lead creative agency for Parmalat brands- The Integer Group announces SA affiliate- Moroke to head up Kantar TNS South Africa- Maja-Rasethaba new partner at M&C Saatchi Abel- Sanef appoints new executive director- Bongiwe Tshiqi new editor for Bona- New editors for Sunday World, Sowetan- Julia Raphaely joins FIPP board Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up here for the MarkLives email newsletter every Monday and Thursday. Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.