MIWAY SHOULD BE PUNISHED FOR UNSOLICITED AND AMBUSH MARKETING The African National Congress (ANC) in KwaZulu-Natal Province joins millions of people across the country in condemning MiWay insurance. This follows the leaking of a recorded conversation between MiWay sales agent and His Majesty, King Goodwill Zwethini. The company has not only undermined His Majesty but has demonstrated its lack of understanding of the importance of the institution of traditional leadership. Historically, traditional leadership has been at the centre of African people for centuries. Any genuine history of black man is incomplete without references to the traditional leadership. Our people survived many hardships and battlefields under the guidance of their traditional leadership. Many of the tribes could have been wiped off completely during the olden days if they did not have traditional leadership. The great African Kings are respected by indigenous people for their role in society.They are our pride - and a nation without pride in its culture and customs is no nation at all. The ANC commends the Zulu Royal Family for its determination to protect the dignity of the Zulu King. We believe that taking legal action against Miway will help send a strong lesson to many other companies that are violating the laws of this country. Miway must be penalized for violating the Consumer Protection Act. The act was introduced to guarantee the “right to privacy” and “right to fair and responsible marketing.” We welcome the swift reaction of the Justice and Correctional Services Committee chaired by Cde Dr Mathole Motshekga. As the ANC we have confidence that this committee will play its oversight role and ensure this matter is resolved by the relevant authorities and mandated by relevant legislation. Section 69 of the Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA) places significant limitations on the circumstances in which a party may engage in direct marketing by means of unsolicited communications by requiring individuals to have either consented to the use of their personal information or for there to be an existing relationship between the parties. In view of this, we are convinced that there is reasonable ground to impose a severe punishment on Miway. In conclusion, we further call on the Information Regulator Adv Pansy Tlakula to demonstrate a sense of urgency and resolve this complaint once it is lodged formally by the Zulu Royal Family. We are convinced that the leak of this recorded conversation was either aimed at using His Majesty for marketing purposes or to embarrass him. The failure by public and private bodies to protect personal information of citizens should be a punishable offence. Statement issued by ANC KZN Provincial Interim Committee Coordinator, Cde Sihle Zikalala, 11 February 2018