EFF wants to give NMB back to lying and looting ANC The EFF’s decision not to support Nelson Mandela Bay (NMB) Municipality’s 2017/18 adjustment budget undermines the work that has been done by the multiparty coalition government since 2016. It is clear that they would rather place their politics ahead of the needs of NMB residents. By not supporting the adjustment budget the EFF attempted to deny the people, especially poor black residents, of NMB critical resources and service delivery, which include: R1-million for much needed informal trader infrastructure; R3-million to keep residents safe through the purchase of vehicles for the Metro Police; Almost R40-million for the electrification of informal dwellings; and R99-million for the tarring of gravel roads in townships. The Council will not be able to proceed with these service delivery programmes and change the lives of the poor due the EFF’s narrow decision, at the eleventh-hour, to change its tune, thus leaving the people of NMB and the Council in limbo. Further to this, the EFF has stated its intention to table a motion of no confidence (MONC) in Mayor Athol Trollip, despite the fact that they have fully supported him on two occasions – once when he was elected by the Council in 2016 and again when the Mayor faced an unsubstantiated MONC tabled by the ANC in November 2017. The EFF’s political schizophrenia will only harm the people of NMB. When the Democratic Alliance (DA) campaigned, it was on the basis of bringing total change to the City; it is clear that the EFF would like to see the ANC return to its old ways of looting the municipality and lying to the people. For the EFF to suggest that the ANC has the ability to present a credible candidate is unthinkable. Many of the country’s problems are of the ANC’s making, regardless of who leads the organisation at all levels. The DA along with its coalition partners will continue to serve the people of NMB, even if the EFF would like to see the municipality collapse under the ANC corruption. Statement issued by Nqaba Bhanga, DA Eastern Cape Provincial Leader, 27 February 2018 Tweet / Facebook post from EFF Chief Whip, Floyd Shivambu, 27 February 2018: Floyd Shivambu - We, the leadership of the the EFF, have officially instructed the leadership of the EFF in the EC to start process of tabling a motion of no confidence against DA Mayor in Nelson Mandela Bay, & publicly state that if the ANC presents a credible candidate, we will vote with them!‬ The DA is cautioned that if it continues to position itself against the people, they will soon be history in Johannesburg and Tshwane. 