Serious cases of abuse at the Don Mattera Child and Youth Centre 12 January 2018 The Democratic Alliance is demanding an urgent investigation into mismanagement at the Don Mattera Child and Youth Centre in Boksburg, where children who went missing were not reported to the police. We will write to the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development in Parliament requesting they investigate these serious allegations. In February 2017 eight girls went missing with some still not being found. We have been informed that four of the girls were taken to Hillbrow and the other four to Alexandra, where they were exposed to child trafficking and drug syndicates. Of the missing girls, a 14-year-old was found prostituting in Yeoville and later returned to the care of her parents. The management of the Centre did nothing to find the girls and their disappearance was not reported to the South African Police Service (SAPS) nor the Department of Social Development. It is unacceptable that girls who are placed in the care of the Centre, end up being abused. As it stands, incident reports are not being filed when children go missing or are abused at the Centre. Several scandals at the home have sounded alarms over the management of the Centre which operates with little public oversight. Other alleged serious instances that have been reported to the DA include; Girls being raped, underage children found engaging in sexual intercourse, security catching five boys leaving a girls’ room in the early hours of the morning, one girl expelled after falling pregnant, younger boys handing over their lunches to older ones to avoid sexual abuse at night, boys bringing drugs into the home, and a fire that started in one of the boys’ rooms. A recent report by the SA Human Rights Commission has revealed that the Centre has not been quality assured by the Department of Social Development. The DA wants the department to improve the skills of care home workers so they are better able to identify risks and take action before children run away. The Portfolio Committee needs to initiate a full investigation into the running of the Centre and hold all those who have failed in their duty to account. Issued by Michael Waters, DA Deputy Chief Whip in the National Assembly and Lethabong Constituency Head, 12 February 2018