BLF Western Cape says voetsek Johann Rupert, we are coming for our land! Black First Land First Western Cape (BLF-WC) is not phased by Johann Rupert’s tantrums. Rupert continues to use courts to interdict BLF from the land that his family stole from the black majority. The vexatious interdicts are meant to intimidate and dissuade BLF from exercising its mission, which is to expropriate land from the likes of Rupert who continues to hoard our land and farms, while we, the landless black masses, continue to be landless, starved and hungry. The land thief, Rupert, is clearly shaken by BLF as proponents of radical economic transformation, in particular, our strong belief in land return without compensation. Today, 13 February 2018, the Western Cape High Court – Court Room 16, heard the matters which include 10 farms which the land thieves wish to interdict black landless masses from. The matter will return to the High Court on 27 February 2018. Included in the list of farms are: Hanneli Rupert’s LA Motte, which was recently set on fire. Hanneli Rupert is Johann Rupert’s daughter. Denneguer, which BLF visited last year. Rupert & Rothschild Vignerons. We know that Rothschild is the evil white family which former Finace Minister, the sellout Trevor Manuel, represents and works for. The High Court refused to lift the interdicts against BLF. We accept this but we say the interdict is only for BLF members but other landless black people are free to occupy the farms. These interdicts and court appearances are very expensive and as poor black people, we do not have the means to oppose them all. We will consult and make a decision on the best way to advance the struggle for land prior to the next court date. Land thieves are using the courts to illegally remove President Zuma and they are also using the courts to stop black people from reclaiming the land which was stolen. Like President Zuma, we are constitutional delinquents, and we are not afraid of these courts which seek to maintain our landlessness! Land or Death! Statement issued by Provincial Coordinating Committee of Black First Land First Western Cape (BLF-WC PCC) 13 February 2018 Earlier statement: BLF welcomes the fire on Johann Rupert’s family farm 7 February 2018 We are excited by the news that fire has broken out in some of the farms currently illegally owned by the Rupert family. Black First Land First (BLF) believes that the fire is the retribution by our black God. The fire is just and welcomed. In May 2017, BLF gave whites until December that year to meet as whites and decide how to return our land. But like the stubborn and arrogant pharaohs of the bible, whites have responded with laughter at our call. We prayed to our black Gods to give us strength, unity and to punish those who stole our land. We prayed for draught and we prayed for fire upon the thieves. Our black God is slowly answering our prayers. Whites, for the first time since they arrived here from Europe, are experiencing lack of water. Before they arrived here we had the water. They came and took our land and water. BLF believes the fire on the Rupert farms is part of the fulfilment of the prophesy as recorded in Matthew 3:11. BLF wishes to ask all black people who work on farms to refuse to take the fires out. This fire is a Godly fire and as we all know that which God has started no man can doze off. We warn farm workers, please do not put your lives at risk. This fire is here to purify our land so that we may know peace and prosperity again. All farms on stolen land are legitimate targets of the Godly fire. This is what was prophesied and the time has come for black liberation. More fires are going to break out. The Rupert farms in Mpumalanga shall also see fire not long from now. We pray for more fire. More wind to make the fire burn bigger and more fierce. We pray for blacks to unite and fight. We thank our God for hearing our cries. Land or death! Statement issued by the National Coordinating Committee of the Black First Land First Movement (BLF NCC), 7 February 2018