ANC slams DA spin and lies about Jews 26 February 2018 The dishonest DA in the Western Cape legislature must immediately stop their usual deceit, spin and lies as well as smoke and mirrors when they are caught out for money laundering and colluding to defraud the South African taxpayer of R600 million through kickbacks on desalination tender contracts. ANC Western Cape caucus chair in the legislature Sharon Davids says: “The DA is exposed for its underhand and under-the-table dealings with a foreign based company to supply desalination capacity during the present drought in the province while there are local companies that could do the job just as well. “I have pointed out this illegal and secret pact that is revealed by DA members themselves. These inside and public sources identified the corruption partners of the DA as Israel based people. This small group is also referred to by the DA insiders as a mafia. The ANC is very clear on its position that many South African people of Jewish persuasion have been involved in the struggle for freedom and justice in our country – for which we owe gratitude. The ANC also recognises South Africa in her full diversity with various linguistic, religious and cultural communities. Therefore the ANC has not and will not be anti-Semitic. “I therefore reject the invention by certain DA members of the legislature that I have taken aim at Jewish people as a whole during my speech on Friday in reaction to premier Helen Zille’s state of the province address. It is also ludicrous to even suggest that I have incited hate against the whole Jewish community to be inflicted or harmed in any way. “I have indicated that the collusion between the DA and the foreign based business people to fleece the state be investigated under the prevention of organised crime and anti-corruption legislation. I further called on more investigation against other DA leaders in the national assembly, including DA leader Mmusi Maimane, to be carried out as they seem to have breached our law with various dubious actions. “If any person of the Jewish community felt aggrieved by the way the story was turned by DA spin-doctors, I apologise and ensure them that it is not my intention to taint people of Jewish or Israeli origin. I sincerely hope this clarifies the matter.” Issued by Cobus Grobler on behalf of ANC Western Cape, 26 February 2018