MEC and Supra must explain R30m payment to Gupta-linked company 5 February 2018 The Democratic Alliance in the North West Province will table questions in the North West Provincial Legislature to the MEC for Health, Dr Magome Masike after reports surfaced that Mediosa, a company linked to the Guptas received a R30 million advance payment from the North West Department of Health. The Democratic Alliance will ask the MEC: - To provide information on the supply chain management processes that resulted in the appointment of Mediosa; - If there were any endeavours made by the North West Health Department to procure the services of local providers for the provision of mobile healthcare facilities in the Province; - The reasons for allocating such a huge contract to a single foreign-owned project without prior budget allocation; - If there was undue political influence by his seniors in the department to award the contract to Mediosa; and - Whether there is a relationship between Mediosa and the Gupta family or businesses related to the Gupta family. We view the allegations of possible misappropriation of public funds seriously and will ensure that the MEC provides a full account of the R50 million contract awarded to Mediosa. Furthermore it is no secret that Premier Supra Mahumapelo is proud of his affiliation with the Guptas. He openly praised them for their “valuable contributions”. Mahumapelo will stop at nothing to keep power and protect cadres – even if it means to use the people’s money for shady deals. Gupta-corruption and state capture ranges far and wide: From Luthuli House to every province in the country - including the North West. It seems that MEC Masike is just another ANC-politician to succumb to political pressure to award a lucrative contract to a Gupta-linked company, apparently so that ANC-politicians could line their own pockets. This money should have been used to improve the collapsing health resources in this province and not for the enrichment of the North West ANC elite and their cronies. The DA will continue to expose corruption and any attempts at state capture in the province. Issued by Tutu Faleni, North West DA Health Spokesperson, 5 February 2018