New tariffs to encourage 50-litre usage In line with Level 6 drought measures, the February 2018 water and sanitation accounts of our water users will reflect a tariff increase. This is an absolutely necessary step to reducing household demand and to ensure that the City can continue to supply water and sanitation services. The City makes NO PROFIT on water sales. We will still cover the cost of basic water for our indigent residents, but for the rest of our water users these tariff increases are unavoidable. The highest users will face the greatest increases. The City thanks our residents for their major efforts over the past year to reduce their water consumption. Unfortunately, we still have to reduce consumption further to ensure that we do not run out of water. We find ourselves in a truly unprecedented situation and, as a City, we have had to make some incredibly difficult choices. It must be emphasised that all water and sanitation revenue from the tariff increases goes toward water and sanitation services. The tariffs are linked to usage. The more you use, the more you pay. Yesterday we announced that Day Zero, the day we may have to start queueing for water, is expected to move out to 11 May 2018 due to a decline in agricultural usage. Since the implementation of Level 6 restrictions, there has been a further decline in urban usage but not at a sufficient scale. All Capetonians must therefore endeavour to use no more than 50 litres per person per day to help stretch our dwindling supplies through summer. We trust that the tariff increases will serve as deterrent against high usage. As a City, we are required to keep within the allocation as set by the National Department of Water and Sanitation. We are not there yet. All preparations for the possibility of reaching Day Zero continue, but if residents continue to reduce overall water consumption, that can still be avoided. The City also continues with the roll-out of aggressive pressure management initiatives in an effort to stretch our supplies even further. Cost of water: total monthly bill (Level 6 tariffs) (including VAT) for non-indigent person: 6 kl       R 179.58 10.5 kl  R 415.56 20 kl     R 1 555.56 35 kl     R 6 685.56 50 kl     R 20 365.56 See the following link for all of the new tariff details: http://bit.ly/WaterTariff Please visit www.capetown.gov/thinkwater for all water-related information, including Level 6B restrictions and FAQs about Day Zero as well as tips to lower usage even further. Also visit www.capetown.gov.za/watermap to see if your household is painting the city green to avoid Day Zero. Statement issued by Alderman Ian Neilson, Executive Deputy Mayor, City of Cape Town, 6 February 2018 *** Further pressure management testing aims to force consumption down The City of Cape Town’s agreement with its water users aims to bring collective usage down to 450 million litres per day. This requires individual water users to stay within a daily allocation of 50 litres per day to avoid the possibility of Day Zero. Read more below: As part of our ongoing efforts to prevent Day Zero, the day we may have to start queueing for water, we will be testing and preparing the following supply zones for the implementation of pressure management: - Delft area which is bounded by Stellenbosch Arterial to the north, Sheffield Road to the west, the R300 to the east and the N2 to the south. The work is scheduled to take place on Tuesday, 6 February 2018 from 20:00 to 04:00. - Epping Industrial 1 and 2 areas, bounded by Viking Way to the north, Jan Smuts Drive to the west, by Valhalla Drive to the east. The work is scheduled to take place on Tuesday, 6 February 2018 from 20:00 to 04:00. - Brooklyn area which is bounded by Boundary and Sable roads to the north, the N1 to the east and south. The work is scheduled to take place on Wednesday, 7 February 2018 from 20:00 to 04:00. - Woodstock and Salt River areas which are bounded by Strand Road to the north, Nelson Road to the west, Albert Road and Liesbeek Parkway to the east and Alma Road to the south. The work is scheduled to take place on Tuesday, 6 February 2018 from20:00 to 04:00. Other areas will be informed of supply disruptions in due course. Affected areas are requested not to stockpile large volumes of municipal water as the service interruptions are not expected to be in effect for long periods. ‘The City thanks its residents for their cooperation in reducing water consumption thus far, and regrets any inconvenience this pressure management work will cause but it is absolutely vital that we do try everything in our power to stretch our water supplies. ‘Not only does pressure management generally lower consumption by reducing the rate at which water flows to properties, it also reduces the risk of leaks and pipe bursts by better ensuring that pressure remains within levels that reduce stress on the infrastructure. ‘We are doing absolutely everything in our power to help Team Cape Town to avoid Day Zero. We must lower consumption otherwise we will reach Day Zero. ‘We have identified at least 25 areas across the city that could benefit from this technology. Further implementation will be rolled out over the next few months and contractors have been brought in to speed up the programme,’ said Peter Flower, the City of Cape Town’s Director for Water and Sanitation. At all times careful consideration is being given to ensure minimal disruption to the water supply in the affected areas. Roll-outs to other parts of the metro will be communicated in due course. Please keep all taps closed and store 5 to10 litres of water for essential purposes during this time. Do not store an excessive amount of municipal water. Statement issued by Farouk Robertson, Communication Officer: Water and Sanitation Management Department, City of Cape Town, 6 February 2018