Dlamini will once again jeopardise the livelihood of millions unless Treasury takes over Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbites in IsiZulu and English by DA Shadow Minister of Social Development Bridget Masango MP. The DA supports a report submitted to the Constitutional Court this week by the panel of experts appointed to oversee SASSA’s readiness to take over the distribution of social grants. In its report, the panel has recommended that the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation investigate the desirability of National Treasury taking over the payment of social grants, as well as the feasibility of SASSA or the Department of Social Development (DSD) taking over the functions of administration, registration and verification. The DA has in the past called on Treasury to take over the payment function from SASSA, as the agency has become compromised under the toxic influence of Minister Bathabile Dlamini. Some of the risks the panel have identified are: SASSA has no immediate plan to properly audit the number and location of cash payment points in the near future; SASSA seeks to extend the CPS contract beyond 1 April 2018 in order to allow for the phase out of CPS and phase in of the new service provider, however they are yet to approach the Constitutional Court for approval; and There seems to not be a transition agreement with CPS to ensure the continuation of cash payments from 1 April 2018, as well as an agreement to phase out CPS  once a new service provider in place. With less than two months until the April 1st deadline, these risks are very alarming. Last week, the South African Post Office CEO, Mark Barnes, accused the Minister of being “non-responsive and causing delays”; a further indication of an imminent crisis. SASSA and Minister Dlamini appears to be dragging their feet on finding an alternative service provider and there does not seem to be a clear plan of action. It is clear that we are fast approaching another social grants standoff – with Minister Dlamini, SASSA and CPS on one side and 17 million poor and vulnerable South Africans on the other side. The DA will always stand with the beneficiaries and we will not allow the Minister or anyone else to place their lives in jeopardy. Statement issued by Bridget Masango MP, DA Shadow Minister of Social Development, 4 February 2018