Statement of the ANC on the election of the new President of the Republic of South Africa, Cde Cyril Ramaphosa 15 February 2018 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the election of the President of the ANC, Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa, as the President of the Republic of South Africa today.  The election of President Ramaphosa today once again affirms the maturing and enduring nature of our democracy. It further provides an opportunity for us all to recommit ourselves to the values that define us as South Africans - upholding the rule of law, advancing the interests of our country above all, promoting and protecting of universal justice, hard work and selfless service to the people - as articulated in the oath we expect our President to take.. Cde Ramaphosa has over many years proven himself equal to the task expected of him, demonstrating his ability to lead with integrity and face challenges that confront our country. As one of the architects of both our world acclaimed Constitution and the transformative National Development Plan (NDP), President Ramaphosa has been part of the men and women who have shaped and defined our aspirations, hopes and vision for our future. The African National Congress has full confidence in President Ramaphosa to build on the foundation laid and focus the country on accelerating our program of fundamental and radical socio-economic transformation.  This will include giving effect to the ANC resolutions to accelerate land redistribution through amongst other mechanisms, the expropriation of land without compensation, and the fulfilment of our decision to provide fee-free education to children of the working class and the poor. The eradication of poverty, inequality and injustice in our country must shape his legacy as president of South Africa. To give effect to this requires, amongst others, restoring the credibility of public institutions, state owned enterprises and law enforcement agencies. It will further demand strong, properly functioning and efficient government at national, provincial and local levels, working together will all social partners. The African National Congress pledges its full support to President Ramaphosa, knowing as we do, that he has always held the ANC as the strategic centre of power and its policies and decisions being the lodestar to the work of government. We further trust and believe that President Ramaphosa enjoys the support of millions in South Africa who now look forward to this new phase in our country’s history. Issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, ANC, 15 February 2018