Preventative measures needed to curb sexual abuse in GP schools 12 February 2018 The DA calls on both the Gauteng Premier, David Makhura and the MEC for Education, Panyaza Lesufi to urgently institute preventative measures to curb the escalating incidents of sexual abuse in Gauteng schools. This follows a visit to Reiger Park Secondary School as the latest school dominated the news after allegations of sexual abuse at schools in Gauteng where the former principal is accused of sexually abusing not only learners but teachers and support staff as well. Today, I together with Boksburg West Constituency Head and DA Shadow Minister for Higher Education and Training, Belinda Bozzoli MP visited the Reiger Park Secondary School in Ekurhuleni. The purpose of the visit was to assess the extent of the impact of this sexual scandal on teaching and learning in this school. We discovered that the situation is calm and learning and teaching has been reinstituted as normal. This school is however facing a serious challenge of learners bunking classes and hiding in the nearby bushes. This gives the impression that the school lacks discipline and leadership. The DA acknowledges the support that the Department has been providing to this school, however it’s not enough, as the school lacks a competent leader that is capable of instilling discipline amongst both teachers and learners and creating a sense of security in the community. The DA believes that the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry to probe sexual abuse in Gauteng schools is the most effective solution to this serious problem. The Commission of Inquiry will ensure that we understand the nature and extent of this problem and its consequences such as teenage pregnancy, a high drop-out rate, underperformance and sexual assaults, to mention a few. It will also give the department a clear indication in terms of the support system that must be provided in schools to prevent issues of sexual abuse. We will continue to put pressure on the Premier, David Makhura to ensure that a hot-line is established for learners to report sexual abuse in schools and for the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry. Issued by Khume Ramulifho, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 12 February 2018