FF Plus will ensure that premier keeps his promise to combat corruption 26 February 2018 The provincial address by the North West premier, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, was full of promises of lifestyle audits of individuals, investigations into and the combating of corruption, swift action against officials and politicians that are guilty of such offences and much more, and the FF Plus will wait and see if the premier keeps to his promises. On Friday, Mahumapelo delivered his provincial address in the same style as the president’s State of the Nation Address and he also prescribed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s guidelines for the combating of corruption in the province. He, however, did not give a timeline for his plans to combat corruption. According to the premier, various investigations will be launched and lifestyle audits will be done on officials and politicians in the province. Lifestyle audits on members of the Legislature will be conducted within fourteen days, but there were no timelines or deadlines given for the planned investigations into irregularities at the Provincial Departments of, amongst others, Health, Education, Agriculture and Public Works. And the same goes for the forensic investigations into the financial state of local municipalities that include Madibeng, Matlosana, JB Marks, Naledi, Mahikeng, Tswaing, Ramotshere, Ditsobotla, Dr. Kenneth Kaunda and Ngaka Modiri Molema. Without providing a clear plan outlining timelines, deadlines, targets and the managing of outcomes, the premier’s promises sound empty. The FF Plus will address a question to the premier that will require of him to provide a clear plan outlining the deadlines for when the planned investigations must be concluded as well as what the consequences will be for the guilty parties. We will insist that he makes good on his promises before the 2019 elections and we will keep a keen eye on the progress of the investigations. Issued by Hannes Schutte, FF Plus MPL: North West Legislature, 26 February 2018