Johannesburg – While the Zulu monarch was seeking legal guidance following the leaking of a recorded MiWay Insurance conversation with Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini, a parliamentary portfolio committee called for action to be taken against the company. Parliament's Portfolio Committee on Justice and Corrections Services on Saturday said the incident was a clear violation of the Protection of Private Information Act (POPIA). King Zwelithini was offered low premiums on his car insurance, house and his furniture by sales agent S'thembiso Sithole, reported eNCA. Zwelithini asked Sithole if he knew who he was talking to and he responded by saying "with Zwelithini Zulu". The king tells Sithole that he is talking to the wrong person because he is the king of the Zulu nation. Zwelithini also lashed out at Sithole for pestering him during a meeting with President Jacob Zuma. The conversation ended with Zwelithini blessing Sithole, telling him he would get married soon. “It is even of greater concern that the said taped conversation was later leaked on social media,” said committee chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga. “The [POPIA] Act makes provision for how private or public bodies should be handling personal information of individuals and the rights of individuals to have their information protected. This includes the rights of royalty," he explained. "The African royalty are the custodians of the ethical and moral values of their people and the actions of MiWay are not only an insult on the Zulu people but all peace-loving and progressive people and must be condemned." Motshekga said traditional kings were the custodians of culture and all protocols were trampled on by MiWay and its agents. "This is unacceptable." He said the committee supported the Zulu Royal Family's decision to lodge a complaint with the Information Regulator. “We support whatever action the Royal Family take under the law. The regulator was specifically mandated to enforce compliance with the Act which promotes the protection of personal information by public and private bodies,” said Motshekga. Earlier on Saturday, the royal family issued a statement saying it felt disrespected after the sales agent addressed the king by his name. Spokesperson for the royal family, Prince Thulani Zulu, in a statement said although the employee was remorseful after the king had reprimanded him, the royal family was disappointed that instead of making a formal apology, MiWay Insurance leaked the audio clip to members of the public. "We do not only consider this an insult to the Zulu nation but we believe that it is an indication of a high level of intolerance of the culture and customs of indigenous people of this country." Zulu said the office of the king was seeking legal guidance to explore possibilities of taking legal action against MiWay Insurance. MiWay CEO responds MiWay Insurance CEO Rene Otto responded to the matter in a tweet "I just got off the phone with his Excellency the King of the Zulu nation to apologise (as CEO) on behalf of MiWay and was blown away by his sense of humour. He found it very funny that the incident is all over social media. Amazing individual. Much respect!" Otto explained that the blunder was calling the King by his first name. "When I called the King yesterday to apologise, as CEO, on behalf of MiWay, he was very relaxed about the incident. He had a good laugh about the fact that the incident was "all over social media" and said "don't worry, brother". We appreciate his generosity and humanness." News24 Mantashe on Zexit: End game is nigh as talks carry on without Zuma Johannesburg - ANC National Chairperson Gwede Mantashe has given the strongest indication yet that the talks on President Jacob Zuma’s fate are nearing an end. Mantashe confirmed to SABC that the party’s top 6 is meeting today without Zuma. “There is agreement on the end game, what is being discussed is the timing and the process that should be followed,” Mantashe told the public broadcaster on the side lines of the party’s 106 birthday celebration in Mpumalanga. Earlier during his address Mantashe lashed out at those insulting party president Cyril Ramaphosa over ongoing Zuma to force him to resign and appealed for patience. “If the president of ANC says wait for me, I am still talking to President Jacob Zuma, there is no need to insult him," Mantashe said. Allow Ramaphosa to use his personality and art of leadership to manage, Mantashe said in the SABC interview. “But if he is going to be leading on the basis of the cacophony of noises around us, he will commit mistakes – it is [for the] protection of the president of the ANC to tell analysts to back off. Don’t dictate what he should do and put labels to force him to do what you think must be done now,” Mantashe said, slamming analysts who this week asked “where are Ramaphosa’s balls” amidst the country's anxiety over Zuma’s future. Ramaphosa met with Zuma on Tuesday, after he refused to step down during a meeting with the top six on Sunday. The two were widely expected to hold another meeting this weekend, which will signal a final decision on Zuma’s future. However, a presidential official told News24 that there was no meeting planned between Zuma and Ramaphosa. Many reporters were camped outside Zuma's official residence in Pretoria. Sources told News24 on Friday Zuma and Ramaphosa were expected to conclude talks on Zuma’s exit within the next 48 hours, after which the outcome will be announced to the nation. The two were said to be discussing “cosmetic issues”, including the payment of Zuma's future legal fees and security for him and his family. Earlier in the week, Ramaphosa is said to have told ANC MPs that immunity from prosecution was not part of their discussions. Mantashe said Ramaphosa was dealing with a “complex situation”, however, officials were agreed on the “end game.” “People don’t want us to think through issues. They want us to rush through issues, but we must be allowed to manage a very complex situation carefully,” Mantashe said. No expectations from top 6 meeting When asked what South Africans should expect from the top six meeting, he said there should be no expectations. “South Africans must appreciate that the leadership of the ANC is hard at work. Give them space to manage that situation carefully and precisely … so that we don’t stumble. It is important that when you manage a sensitive issue never to be excited. Don’t follow emotion,” he said. The ANC is under pressure to force Zuma out of the Union buildings, with party supporters and opposition planning mass protests to force him to resign. Opposition parties have also asked for the vote of no confidence against Zuma set for February 22 to be brought forward. This week in an unprecedented move, the State of the Nation Address was postponed to allow the ANC to finalise Zuma’s fate. It was followed by the party postponing the party’s emergency National Executive Committee meeting that was due on Wednesday to discuss Zuma’s recall. News24