DA announces Premier Candidates ahead of the 2019 election campaign The Democratic Alliance stands alone in South Africa for running a candidate list process which is transparent and seeks to attract only the best candidates across the country. The selection process is rigorous to ensure that the pool from which Members of Provincial Legislatures, Members of Parliament and Premier candidates are picked from is extensive and has people that are dedicated to the democratic project. We are the only party that runs a process as transparent as this. As we head towards the 2019 election campaign, the DA will field candidates which have been selected by selection panels comprising members of the Federal Executive and Provincial Executives. This Friday, we received a total of 31 applications from Premier candidates across the country. These nominees will appear before selection panels in their respective provinces and a candidate will be selected from the process. The DA prides itself about this competitive process because our aim is to end up with candidates who will take our offer to the voters and represent their interests. Premier candidates are as follows: Western Cape Fazloodien Abrahams Bonginkosi Success Madikizela David Maynier Kelly Baloyi Jacobus MacFarlane Alan Winde Micheal Mack Gauteng Stanford Makashule Gana Wendy Alexander Sandy Kgaogelo (Khathutshelo) Mbuvha Rachel Katleo Mathebe Ghaleb Cachalia Johannes Page Karabo Grace Tledima Refiloe Ntsekhe Solly Tshepiso Msimanga North West Sandy Kgaogelo (Khathutshelo) Mbuvha Tutu Faleni Thabo Selepe Patrick Sesana Karabo Grace Tledima KwaZulu-Natal Zwakele Maxwell Mncwango Zoe Moore Northern Cape Andrew Louw Limpopo Sandy Kgaogelo (Khathutshelo) Mbuvha Tshedza Tshivhasa Sikhwari Jacobus Frederik Smalle Rembuluwani Thelma Marole Free State Coreen Malherbe Semakaleng Patricia Kopane Eastern Cape Mzwenqaba Bhanga We wish all nominees the very best for this process and we are confident that the whole exercise will be underscored by the party’s vision for South Africa. The country needs total change. We are faced with rampant crime and corruption and a growing number of unemployed South Africans, the DA is the only organisation that can make the difference needed. As the only party that has consistently grown every election cycle we remain resolute in governing the Western Cape with an increased majority and becoming the largest party in Northern Cape and Gauteng and this requires ensuring that we have the best candidates to deliver the change that South Africa desperately needs. Statement issued by James Selfe MP, DA Federal Council Chairperson, 1 July 2018