DA calls for ANC Cash-Heist involvement to be fully probed by the Hawks 19 July 2018 Yesterday’s revelations that ANC Luthuli House staff have been planning and running Cash-in-Transit heists, demand immediate investigation of all criminal activity being run out of Luthuli House. Once more the ANC at its highest levels is revealed as a criminal organization, and a party that has abandoned the values of Nelson Mandela to become little more than a front for crime and corruption. The ANC continues to leave the people of South Africa behind, as it focuses on self-enrichment. The DA has today requested a full and thorough investigation into all crime being planned out of Luthuli House be conducted by the Hawks. We call on the Head of the Hawks to prioritize this investigation, without fear or favour, and to move on Luthuli House as early as today. It is highly unbelievable that Mr Present could run intricate Cash-in-Transit heists only in his spare time. According to ANC NEC member and Police Minister, Bheki Cele, Mr Present, is linked to three heists. The DA also calls on the ANC to immediately hand over all computer and electronic equipment of the cash-heist suspect employee, Mr. Present, to the Police for investigation. In order to expose the rot of crime at Luthuli House, the ANC must hand over Mr. Present’s: Computers E-mails Telephones Telephone records Hard-drives The DA calls on the ANC to hand these over today, without any delay, if the party is at all committed to dealing with this serious crime in its own ranks, and crime in general. We further call on the ANC to open its books to public scrutiny so as satisfy the people of South Africa, that the Party does not run its day-to-day an campaign operations with the proceeds of cash-transit-heists and crime in general. Recently the depth of criminality in the ANC has been widely exposed, from alleged involvement in the illegal cigarette trade, to collaboration with violent gangsters and state capture suspects, to Mr. Mduduzi Manana’s conviction for assault, Cllr. Andile Lungisa’s conviction for assault, Cllr. Sipho Maselane’s conviction for rape and robbery, among many other cases. Convicted fraudster, Tony Yengeni’s elevation as head of the ANC’s crime and corruption working group, is clear sign that the ANC does not take matters of crime and corruption seriously – acts that rob communities of opportunities and lives. The ANC may have a new leader but it continues with its old ways. While the ANC lurches from criminal incident to incident, the people of South Africa suffer under failing service delivery and increasing crime on our streets. South Africa desperately needs to see order restored, and crime effectively policed. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA National Spokesperson, 19 July 2018