Media Statement: New Equal Education Leadership Elected at 3rd National Congress Today On the fourth and final day of Equal Education's 3rd National Congress, delegates voted to elect the new members of our National Council - our movement's highest decision-making structure. Held at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, Congress was attended by delegates elected to represent Equal Education branches in the Western Cape, Gauteng, Eastern Cape, Limpopo, and KwaZulu-Natal. These branches comprise learner, parent, post-school youth, and staff members of the movement. The entire newly-elected National Council was presented to delegates during the closing session of Congress this evening. The 19 members of the National Council that Equal Education today elected to lead our movement include: Chairperson of the National Council: Thabang Mabuza Deputy Chairperson Equaliser: Siyanda Tyuthwana Deputy Chairperson Post-School Youth: Sindisa Monakali General Secretary: Noncedo Madubedube Deputy General Secretary: Tracey Malawana Earlier this week, Equal Education’s outgoing leadership tabled reports on our governance, campaigns, finances, and operations over the last three years, detailing the specific challenges faced and obstacles overcome. Congress delegates assessed these reports, and passed Congress resolutions that give Equal Education’s new National Council a clear sense of our movement’s goals and guiding principles for up until 2021, and a framework against which the National Council will be held accountable at the next National Congress. Those resolutions include that the National Council must ensure that Equal Education members are educated and can engage on issues such as race, patriarchy, gender, and sexual orientation both within the movement and in society. This must form a core part of the political agenda and political education of Equal Education. The National Council must each year report on whether all provinces have engaged on this. Delegates debated and adopted amendments to Equal Education’s Constitution, designed to build stronger accountability mechanisms for elected leaders, and to give ordinary members a more powerful voice in determining the direction of the movement in between National Congresses. In particular, Constitutional amendments were adopted that ensure the independence of Equal Education’s governance structures from its operational staff, and guarantee representation on the National Council for learners in every province in which Equal Education is organised. NOTE: EQUAL EDUCATION STAFF AND MEMBERS ARE TAKING A WELL-DESERVED BREAK. ALL OUR OFFICES WILL BE CLOSED, AND THERE WILL NOT BE ANY ORGANISING ACTIVITIES FROM 6 JULY TO 16 JULY. Statement issued by Equal Education, 5 July 2018