City’s roads repair teams busy fixing potholes after heavy rains The City of Cape Town’s road repair teams from the Roads and Stormwater Department are busy inspecting and infilling some 2 150 potholes that have been reported by residents following the recent rains. Residents are encouraged to exercise patience with the temporary road repairs until more favorable, continuous drier weather conditions allow for more permanent repairs. Read more below: The formation of potholes during winter is a common occurrence as it is directly related to the heavy rainfalls and the age or condition of the roads. As such, the City’s Transport Information Centre has received an increase in the number of reports related to potholes in various parts of the city as a result of the much-needed recent severe rainstorms. ‘Approximately 2 150 potholes in various areas across the city have been reported between 1 June and 9 July 2018. This is in comparison to the same period last year when 859 potholes were logged. When comparing the figures, we have to take into account that we have experienced more rain recently than we have in previous years,’ said Councillor Brett Herron, Mayoral Committee Member for Transport and Urban Development. The road repair teams are being dispatched to attend to the temporary repair of the potholes in the various areas. Part of the repair work includes a visual inspection of the roads that have been reported and adding those to our priority list. ‘Residents need to keep in mind that, due to practical reasons, especially in winter, we often do temporary repairs on potholes as a holding action until more favorable, drier weather conditions allow for more permanent repair. Permanent repairs will not be effectively achieved when a road or the base layers underneath the road are still wet. ‘Temporary repairs will consist of infilling the pothole with ‘coldmix’ while the permanent repair will entail cutting the existing road surface around the pothole, preparing the base course, applying tack coat to the prepared base course and finally placing the hot premix,’ said Councillor Herron. Although the presence of water is the primary cause of potholes, the formation of potholes differs somewhat depending on the existing road or pavement composition. Potholes can also result from non-structural causes such as diesel spillages, vehicle accidents, fires, or poor road drainage over certain subgrades. ‘It must be noted that the majority of potholes form in the wet or rainy season. When it rains and the water accumulates on the road, tyres from the vehicles actually squeeze the water in to the road pavement layer. The repeated pump action between the road surface and the tyres of the vehicles causes the road to crack. Water gets through the cracks and weakens the pavement layers, which in turn leads to more cracking and eventually a pothole forms,’ said Councillor Herron. Residents can report potholes to the Transport Information Centre on 0800 65 64 63. This is a 24/7 information centre and is toll free from a landline or a cell phone. Alternatively, residents can email Transport.Info@capetown.gov.za. ‘Residents are reminded to please include their name, contact number and the location of the pothole. We want to thank our residents who have been reporting potholes. We appreciate your patience while our teams are attending to the increased volumes of reports that we have been receiving,’ Councillor Herron. Statement issued by the City of Cape Town, 11 July 2018