Post Office strike causes delay in delivery of municipal accounts The City of Cape Town is expecting some delays in the postal delivery of its municipal invoices and motor vehicle licence disc renewals which have been applied for online for the month of July 2018 due to the ongoing South African Post Office strike. Read more below: The South African Post Office (SAPO) has informed the City of Cape Town about possible delays in the postal delivery of municipal accounts. Until recently, the City was not affected by the ongoing postal worker’s strike. Unfortunately, the protracted SAPO strike will be affecting the delivery of some municipal invoices for the month of July 2018 and may also affect the delivery of motor vehicle licence discs which have been applied for online over the past two weeks. The City would like to apologise for any inconvenience caused as a result of the ongoing strike. When received, the invoice will still reflect the due date but interest charges will not be levied for any late receipt of payment as a result of the delays caused by the strike. In the interim, if customers have already registered on the City’s e-services portal, they will be able to access their information by logging in to their online account. Residents with valid cell phone numbers on the City’s billing system should receive an SMS reflecting the amount due for payment. Another option is for ratepayers to pay using the previous month’s invoice and to pay a similar but higher amount (taking the increased tariffs into consideration) as per the previous invoice. Alternatively, ratepayers can contact the City’s Call Center on 0860 103 089 to determine the amount due. Customers who have recently renewed their motor vehicle licences online may also experience a delay in receiving their motor vehicle licence disc due to the strike. We encourage motorists to rather renew their discs at the City’s motor vehicle licence renewal offices across the metro should they need their disc urgently. Residents are reminded to take along their proof of address when renewing their motor vehicle licences, which must be done annually as this is a National Government requirement. It is very important for customers to have all of the required documentation with them when they apply for licence disc renewals to prevent any additional delays. To avoid delays with receiving municipal invoices as a result of SAPO strike action, residents are encouraged to use the convenient email and e-services options available to them by simply logging on to www.capetown.gov.za and clicking on the e-services icon to register for these services. Statement issued by the City of Cape Town, 13 July 2018