Statement on South Africa hosting the 10th BRICS Summit 23 July 2018 The African National Congress welcomes all Heads of States who will be in the country to attend the 10th Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) Summit from 25th to 27th July 2018. This year’s Summit will be a crucial milestone, as it marks a decade of BRICS cooperation. As the African National Congress, we are confident that the BRICS Leaders’ Summit, will be characterised by fruitful engagements and lead to productive outcomes. South Africa assumed the rotational Chairship of the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) Forum from 1 January to 31 December 2018. The ANC will jealously guard and strengthen our country’s role in BRICS. As the governing party, the ANC has used its progressive internationalism as a prism through which it shapes its foreign policy. We are particularly proud that, in BRICS, we are in partnership with nations that share both our progressive perspective and our commitment to rebuilding and transforming institutions of global governance. As the ANC, we must utilise BRICS to promote a progressive international agenda. Our 54th National Conference noted, among other things, the strategic importance of our BRICS membership as part of our overall international relations strategy and that co-operation through forums such as BRICS is of primary importance to our movement. The triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality continue to confront our society. The ANC is confident that BRICS holds the key to unlock some of the answers to our current socio-economic challenges. In this regard, the ANC has made a call to its cadres in government to ensure that its BRICS membership is leveraged to advance our developmental goals and to ensure that our chairing of BRICS in 2018 is beneficial to South Africa and the entire continent. The ANC takes this opportunity to wish all delegates and participants a fruitful three days that will continue to deepen transformation in our respective countries. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, African National Congress, 23 July 2018