EFF shows its true, immoral colours by siding with Zuma’s state capture 24 July 2018 With its sharp-tongued attack on Mr Pravin Gordhan, the minister of Public Enterprises, the EFF is finally showing its true colours by siding with former President Jacob Zuma and state capture in opposition to clean administration. The EFF’s Secretary General, Godrich Gardee, sent a letter to all the boards of the state-owned enterprises that are under the administration of Public Enterprises. The letter accuses Gordhan of conducting a reign of terror under the guise of “cleaning up” and “fighting state capture”. After first pretending to advocate against Zuma, state capture and the Guptas, the EFF has now made a hundred and eighty degrees turn and showed its true colours with its attack on Gordhan. Over the last few years, it has become evident that the EFF’s supposed fight against state capture is not honest nor honourable and that it was simply a game the party played for political gain. In the interim, Gordhan’s hand must be strengthened so that he can continue his clean-up of entities affected by the cancer of state capture so as to steer South Africa away from the fiscal cliff, which poses a considerable threat to the country’s economy. The revolutionary environment in which Gordhan has to save these entities is clearly becoming more and more intense and one can justly ask why the EFF suddenly feels threatened now that decisive action is being taken against state capture and corruption. The EFF’s chairperson, Adv Dali Mpofu, is currently acting on behalf of Mr Tom Moyane, suspended head of the South African Revenue Service, in Moyana’s disciplinary hearing. From Gardee’s letter it can be gleaned that the EFF will also act on behalf of the Transnet head, Mr Siyabonga Gama, who is allegedly also in Gordhan’s crosshairs. The EFF-mask has fallen off and there is no doubt about where the party stands with regard to state capture and corruption. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson, 24 July 2018