Disciplinary hearing against Eskom’s head of legal recommends a summary dismissal 20 July 2018 The disciplinary hearing of Eskom’s suspended head of legal and compliance, Suzanne Daniels, has been completed, with the disciplinary hearing’s independent chairperson Adv. Nazir Cassim SC recommending that Ms Daniels be summarily dismissed. Adv. Cassim SC found that Ms Daniels had committed serious misconduct and also breached her duty of good faith and a duty of trust and confidence to Eskom and recommended a summary dismissal. To this end, Eskom has considered the recommendation of Adv. Cassim SC and has accepted it, and a letter from Eskom confirming the sanction of summary dismissal as recommended by Adv. Cassim SC has already been sent to Ms Daniels. Ms Daniels was placed on suspension with full pay by the new board and management on 16 March 2018. The new board and management have always maintained that they did not know Ms Daniels and had no vendetta against her. However, the board and management were concerned with the serious allegations made against her which they felt had to be ventilated through an independent disciplinary process before an independent and impartial chairperson. Ms Daniels was facing four charges of misconduct, namely: Distribution of confidential Eskom proprietary interest to a third party; Her involvement in the McKinsey and Trillian transactions; Her involvement in the Tegeta transaction; and Her mandating a firm of attorneys and approving payment to the firm of attorneys for legal services rendered to former SABC board chairperson in the SABC Parliamentary Inquiry, which had absolutely nothing to do with Eskom. The hearing commenced on 14 May 2018 and was finalised on 6 July 2018 with Eskom and Ms Daniels submitting their written submissions on Friday, 13 July 2018. The chairperson of the disciplinary hearing found against Ms Daniels on all four charges. Adv. Cassim SC added that: “Eskom must evaluate the role of service providers, namely lawyers, accountants and other professionals in the transactions dealt with in these charges to understand culpability on the part of such professionals (if any). This is important because it sends a message that professionals owe a duty to the client, namely Eskom, and not to senior officials in control of Eskom. It will also ensure a consciousness and sensitise professionals to uphold ethical standards as opposed to pursuing monetary gains only. Eskom must pursue civil proceedings against all those implicated in wrongdoing”. The board and management are encouraged by the ruling of Adv. Cassim SC and are resolute on restoring good governance and ethical conduct at Eskom. Issued by Eskom Media Desk, 23 July 2018