STATEMENT OF THE ANC KWAZULU-NATAL PROVINCIAL TASK TEAM Provincial Land Summit The African National Congress (ANC) held a successful Land Summit in order to reflect on the land question which has been, for centuries, the pre-occupation of the African people and their organization, the ANC. The African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal remained deeply committed to the resolutions of the ANC 54th National Conference which strongly advocated for expropriation of land without compensation. It is our considered view, as a movement, that the land question remains fundamental and central to our struggle for economic emancipation. The ANC calls of the people KwaZulu-Natal to seize the opportunity created by the National Parliament and actively participate in all public hearings on the land question. The struggling people and toiling masses of South Africa and KwaZulu-Natal in particular places their hopes and aspirations on the quality of leadership to be provided by their organisation in addressing the legacy of colonialism and apartheid. The land question remains at the centre of that struggle. The ANC will continue to engage with the traditional leadership, including His Majesty, King Goodwill Zwelithini in an effort to build an overarching consensus on the best modalities to address this emotive issue of land. Preparations for the provincial conference The Provincial Task Team has taken a decision to reconvene the aborted 8th ANC Provincial Conference in order to elect the Provincial Executive Committee. This decision was taken after an extensive internal discussion seeking to find solutions to all challenges that led to the court interdict. The ANC Provincial Task Team remains deeply committed to the strategic task of unity and cohesion of our movement in our province. It is in this context that both the applicants and defendants have decided on the out of court settlements which paves the way to the provincial conference. This is a giant step which reaffirms the central on the ANC in finding amicable solutions to all our challenges. The Provincial Task Team applauds all comrades who worked day and night spurring neither effort nor energy in finding an organic solution for which we all committed. Work is proceeding to ensure that a suitable venue is secured for the 8th Provincial Conference scheduled from the 19th – 21st July 2018. The Provincial Task Team calls on all cadres, members, leaders, activists and supporters of the ANC to rally behind the call for a united African National Congress. The unity of the ANC is paramount and essential for the course of our people to build a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous society. This is a tasked bequeathed to us by successive generations of revolutionaries who led our people before and after the formation of the African National Congress. The struggle continues!! Victory is certain!! Statement issued by Cde Sihle Zikalala ANC KZN Provincial Task Team Coordinator, 13 July 2018