Gauteng ANC governance failure causes lights to go out in Emfuleni 24 July 2018 Eskom has issued a notice that it intends to start phasing in scheduled power interruptions in ANC-run Emfuleni as the municipality has failed to adhere to the terms of its re-payment plan. Monthly debt to Eskom has increased by R200 million and residents now face the reality that come 6 August 2018 scheduled power cuts will become the norm. Despite the municipality having recently been placed under Section 139 administration, this intervention has come too late to avert these scheduled black-outs. According to Eskom, the Provincial ANC-government refused to accept the payment plan proposed by the power utility. When questioned about how the provincial government will assist the embattled municipality under Section 139, Gauteng Finance MEC, Barbara Creecy simply stated that a recovery plan had been formulated and is currently sitting with National Treasury for approval. This process could take up to six months. Six months is a life-time to wait for residents who have already faced water throttling by Rand Water and will now be left in the dark. The deployment of Jacob Khawe to Emfuleni as Mayor has, as the DA initially stated, had no impact in turning this desperate situation around. The ANC Provincial Government has dragged its feet on this issue and waited until the last moment to attempt a half-hearted rescue. The DA has for many years warned the provincial government that Emfuleni is a ticking time bomb and the situation would spiral out of control if no proactive steps were taken to arrest its decline. Residents, businesses and the local economy will now suffer due to ANC negligence and incompetence. Emfuleni residents deserve their rights to be upheld, but under an ANC government this will not happen. Come 2019 the people of Emfuleni will have the opportunity to elect a DA Provincial Government that puts people’s rights first. Issued by Adriana Randall, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Finance, 24 July 2018