#AgencyFocus: TBWA\Hunts — “always in beta mode” by Carey Finn. TBWA\Hunt Lascaris is emerging from a two-year-long reinvention process, the results of which are becoming tangible. eMarketplaces & Brands: Impact on consumer product choices by MarkLives. We emailed a panel of key industry executives for their take on the South African ecommerce market. Next up is Melissa Workman of Teljoy. By Invitation Only: Sustainable CSI — support small biz to grow communities by Nontokozo Madonsela. Instead of donating money or even time, companies should look to support businesses already active within communities. Masterclass Notes: Collaboration & changing role of lead agencies by Johanna McDowell. Leading marketers met with agencies last month to discuss the thorny, and often misjudged, issue of collaboration among agencies for the purpose of achieving business objectives for marketers. By Invitation Only: A barking good influence by Federico Dedeu. The petfluencer is emoting its way into the South African influencer market. MarkLives Agency Revenue Rankings 2018 — call for data submissions by MarkLives. To ensure your agency is listed and accessible to both marketers and pitch consultants looking for South African agencies by revenue band, we invite you to complete our Google Form. Regular Reads Cover Stories: Matter, Nest, Romance Journal, Superbalist & The Economist Shelf Life: Pre-loved drives new category • Quickademy • Eat Out app SA TV Ratings: SA TV Ratings: SABC 3 — primetime top 20 for May 2018 On the Radar #Campaigns: Behind KFC's 'Neymar' ad that went viral New MD for Black River FC Jerome Touze joins Travelstart as CMO Pernod Ricard SA appoints media agency Indy agency network seeks SA partners Book Launch: Melusi's Everyday Zulu by Melusi Tshabalala Account Wins: Oxigen Communications • Red Carpet Design Indaba Emerging Creatives opens for applications #Bestread on MarkLives: 24 Jun–1 Jul 2018 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.