Joint media statement issued by the Ministry of Police and the National Commissioner of the South African Police Service Since the implementation of a nationwide stabilisation operation on the 04th of June 2018, more than 40 suspects involved in these crime categories have been arrested. Four of these suspects rank among the top 20 of identified suspects wanted for similar crimes. A substantial amount of money as well as arms and ammunition have been recovered. The most notable achievement of these operations is that these robberies have been reduced significantly by 61% in the month of June 2018 compared to the month of May 2018. In the past week there has been at least five attempted robberies on Cash-in-transit vehicles. Two vehicles, one travelling on the N8 highway from Thaba Nchu and the other from Bostchabelo to Bloemfontein when they were attacked by a group of armed men which left both drivers shot and wounded in the leg. This was followed by another attempted robbery of a CIT vehicle while travelling toward Umtata, then Another on Atlas Road in Boksburg which left one suspect dead and a guard injured. The fifth attempt was at an ATM in Dobsonville in Soweto. It must be noted that the security interventions both by police and private security is making it nearly impossible for armed robbers to access the cash. “The number of arrests is a sign of our commitment to the constitutional mandate to uphold and enforce the law, on the scourge of cash in transit robberies that continue to terrorize our people. Nothing must divert or distract our men in blue from creating a safe and secure environment for all people of South Africa and ensure criminals are brought to justice,” said Minister Cele “We are serious about turning the tide we will not rest until we win the war on criminals,” Minister Cele concluded "Security officers are putting their lives on line on a daily bases to protect the valuable cargo they transport and they must be commended for their efforts" said General Khehla John Sitole. "We will continue to stamp the Authority of the State in our efforts to prevent, combat and investigate crime and we will do this without any fear or favour," added General Sitole. Yesterday, members of a multi-disciplinary investigative task team arrested three men in connection with the robbery at a liquor store earlier this week. On Monday, 2 July 2018 a group of armed men confronted private security officials as they were collecting money inside a liquor store inside Ramotse Section, Hammanskraal - north of Pretoria. The suspects robbed the guard of an undisclosed amount of cash fled. There have been no reports on any damages or injuries caused during that robbery. The multi-disciplinary investigative task team comprising of members from Crime Intelligence, seasoned and experienced detectives and specialised tactical teams were hot on the heels of the suspects. The team tracked down the suspects and arrested three of them aged between 27 and 36 years. We are not ruling out the possibility of more arrests in this case. This is one of many cases of cash-in-transit robberies, attempted cash-in-transit robberies and cross-pavement robberies in which the team has been successful. Statement issued by SAPS, 6 July 2018