SADTU STATEMENT ON MANDELA DAY 18 July 2018 The South African Democratic Teachers’ Union (SADTU) joins millions in South Africa and the rest of the world in celebrating 18 July: Nelson Mandela International Day. This year the day also marks the centenary of the birth of this world icon. As we celebrate the day, we reflect on Mandela’s selfless dedication to the struggle for a free and non-racial and the values he espoused like fairness, equality, reconciliation, forgiveness, justice and being of service to others. As a union in the education sector, we honour Madiba for his total belief in the power of education. He once said, “Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through education that a daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the son of a mine worker can become the head of the mine that a child of a farm worker can become the president of a great nation.” In honour of Mandela’ memory SADTU members will, during the month of July hold activities across provinces aimed at promoting his values and beliefs. Promoting what Mandela stood for would be tantamount to heeding the “Thuma Mina” call made by President Cyril Ramaphosa. SADTU and its investment company SIHOLD shall hold a national event to commemorate Mandela Day on Friday, 20 July at Taudiarora Primary School in Jan Kempdorp, Northern Cape. The Union shall donate uniforms, stationery, toiletries to the school’s 146 learners; donate laptops, a photocopier, gas stove to the school and matrasses and blankets to the school’s crèche. SADTU in KwaZulu-Natal have identified a child-headed family at Ntolwane in Inkandla and mobilised resources to build a house for them. The family has nine children who are still at school. Five of them are attending school at Mnyakanya High School while four are at Ntolwane Primary School. The house will be handed over before the end of July and details will be communicated in due course. SADTU further calls on politicians, public servants and citizens to follow in Mandela’s footsteps and be of service to others not only on Madiba’s birthday but on a daily basis. Mandela abhorred corruption, arrogant and complacent leadership. Statement issued by SADTU, 18 July 2018