Luthuli House ‘employee’ arrested in cash-in transit heist blitz 18 July 2018 Yesterday I was informed of the arrest of four (4) cash-in transit heist suspects, among them an individual believed to be an employee at Luthuli House, the national headquarters of the governing African National Congress (ANC). The suspects were allegedly involved in a cash-in transit heist in Dobsonville, Soweto, which led to a man-hunt being launched. Some of the suspects were arrested on July 6 while the remainder were apprehended in the early hours of July 7. The raid was conducted by a joint operation of the JMPD’s K9 Narcotics Unit and the SAPS. Four hijacked vehicles were recovered, two of which were used in the robbery. I have received confirmation that one of the four suspects arrested is alleged to work at Luthuli House, at the time of his arrest. News of this arrest comes as a shock given the recent spate of cash-in-transit heists in Gauteng, posing a threat to the innocent lives of motorists and pedestrians. Millions of Rand have been stolen with only a negligible amount recovered. That means more dirty money remains in criminal hands to fund further criminal activity. South Africa is truly in the grip of lawlessness and it is my firm belief that this is so because of the culture of impunity that has been allowed to fester by the ruling elite. The arrest of this individual does bring into question whether the ANC has been aware of the arrest of this individual and, if so, why they have remained silent on such an important matter. It also begs the question of how the ANC, while running National Government, can employ individuals who so brazenly undermine public safety and the rule of law in our Country. We must do more to reinvigorate our law enforcement agencies and achieve the collaboration that will turn the tide against criminality in Johannesburg. These arrests demonstrate how, by working together, the SAPS and the JMPD have succeeded in taking dangerous criminals off our streets. The City of Johannesburg with its recruitment of an additional 1500 JMPD cadets will add to the crime fighting abilities of our City. Case by case, we will achieve a Johannesburg that is safer for its residents and a place that criminals will want to stay away from. Statement issued by Cllr Herman Mashaba, Executive Mayor, Johannesburg, 18 July 2018