#IkagengSewage: ANC fails to protect the rights and dignity of the people of Ikageng  The Democratic Alliance (DA) will write to the Minister of Water and Sanitation, Mr Gugile Nkwinti, following our oversight inspection to Ikageng, where we found people living in inhumane and undignified conditions due to the ongoing sewage spill in the area. The DA will ask Minister Nkwiti to immediately intervene and to ensure that the sewage spill is fixed. The DA councillors in the JB Marks will also lay charges against Mayor Kgotso Khumalo and Municipal Manager, Cyril Henry, for allowing residents to suffer under these conditions. Today, Monday 16 July 2018 the DA visited Ikageng township to assess the severity of the sewage spills and the impact it has on the lives of residents living in the area. See photos here and here and here. The DA found that the sewage spills directly into people’s houses, one resident resorted to relocating as the sewage spills directly into his shack and the stench was unbearable. Residents at Extension 11 also told the DA that due to the spillage, the roads in the area are inaccessible and when they get sick ambulances cannot access the area easily. The police are also unable to monitor the area which makes it an easy target for criminal activities. The DA also inspected the Kanana area, we found that in one area the sewage spills directly into a community hall and a school. Learners have to cross the sewage dam on a daily basis just to get to school. Residents told the DA that they have on many occasions reported the issue to the municipality, however the issue is never fixed. Last year the JB Marks council approved an R12 million budget to upgrade the sewage system, however, to date there has not been any actual work or improvement in the area. It is unacceptable that the ANC in JB Marks municipality remains ignorant to the suffering of our people, whilst millions of Rands meant to upgrade and improve the lives of residents remain unaccounted for. The DA will request the Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation, and the Portfolio Committee on Local Government to investigate the R12 million that was allocated to upgrade the sewage system in the area as people are still suffering without a dignified sewage system. The DA will work tirelessly to ensure that the sewage spill is fixed and that the dignity of the people of Ikageng is restored. The only hope for the North West and South Africa is for change led by a DA-led government that will work to put the people first by ensuring the delivery and maintenance of quality servies.  Statement issued by Leon Basson (MP), DA Shadow Minister of Water and Sanitation, 16 July 2018