DA calls on police to investigate ANC link to cash-in-transit heists and accepting VBS funds 23 July 2018 Today, joined by my colleagues, Democratic Alliance (DA) Gauteng Provincial Leader, John Moodey MPL, and Johannesburg MMC for Public Safety, Cllr Michael Sun, we laid charges against the ANC for allegedly accepting the proceeds of crime and corruption to fund their day-to-day and campaign operations. Recently, allegations emerged that the ruling party accepted a R250 000 donation from the embattled VBS Mutual Bank. The payment was made through a shelf company, Robvet’s, bank account which was allegedly used by senior VBS executives to channel fraudulent payments. Furthermore, reports emerged that a Luthuli House employee, Errol Velile Present, had been arrested following his involvement in at least three cash-in-transit (CIT) heists. It cannot be that Present planned these heists during his off time given the resources that go into CIT heists. Luthuli House is, therefore, an active crime scene and the headquarters of a criminal syndicate. Present was at the centre of the corruption scandal where he and his business partner allegedly benefited from the purchase of a R 97 million farm, “Bekendvlei” in Limpopo due to his close proximity to then Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, Gugile Nkwinti. At the time of this scandal being uncovered, the DA reported the matter to the Public Protector for investigation. These allegations are an indictment on the ANC and indicate how deep corruption truly runs within the ruling party. It is for this reason the DA has laid charges against the ANC in terms of Section 4 of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act which refers to the offence of money laundering and Section 6 which makes it an offence to knowingly acquire, use or possess property that forms part of the proceeds of criminal activities. It is now up to the South African Police Service to conduct a thorough investigation to get to the bottom of the ANC’s alleged involvement in possible money laundering and accepting the proceeds of crime. The DA has also written to the Independent Electoral Commission to probe these allegations and we have written to the Hawks to probe all telephone and mail records at Luthuli House. Unlike the ANC, the DA takes the fight against crime and corruption seriously. South Africans deserve a ruling party that governs with integrity and that will put the people first. Clearly, the ANC is not that party and the DA will continue to cut corruption and deliver to the people who have trusted us with their vote. As we head into the 2019 elections, the people of South Africa have a very important choice: Support a party that undermines the laws of the land, puts politics before the people and harbours convicted and suspected criminals or vote for change led by the DA, which will always put the people first and ensure that our communities are led by leaders of integrity. Only the DA can bring the kind of change that the people of South Africa deserve. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA National Spokesperson, 23 July 2018