DA requests IEC investigation into whether ANC used proceeds of crime to campaign The DA has written to the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) Chairperson, Glen Mashinini, to request an urgent investigation into whether or not the ANC is using the proceeds from criminal activities to fund their day-to-day and campaign operations. This follows the disturbing confirmation that an ANC employee, stationed at Luthuli House, has been linked to three cash-in-transit heists. Therefore, any suspicion that funding from illicit activities may have been possibly used by the ANC for campaigning must be fully investigated. Other recent allegations have also suggested that the ANC might be implicated in the VBS scandal, the cost of which has been the near collapse of service delivery across 15 municipalities. On 6 January 2018, a payment of R250,000 marked as "ANC gala dinner event" was reportedly found in Robvet's bank records. The ANC's gala dinner took place just a week later, marking its 106th birthday. The circumstances surrounding the gala dinner support the DA’s belief that the ANC has a case to answer for. To give more credence to our concerns is that there are allegations which refer to directors of VBS's majority shareholder who, through a front company called Vele Investments, donated money to the ANC in exchange for support from the 15 municipalities. The IEC has a duty to keep a watchful eye on the political parties to ensure that elections don’t only run smoothly, but that they are free and fair. Electoral Commission Act 51 of 1996 section 5: Powers, duties and functions of Commission: (1) The functions of the Commission include to- (b) ensure that any election is free and fair; and (c) promote conditions conducive to free and fair elections. In fulfilment of the IEC’s mandate in terms of section 5 of the Electoral Commission Act, we trust that the IEC will look into these very serious allegations without further delay as they pose a threat to the conduct of free and fair elections in 2019.The DA trust that, if needs be, the matter will be referred to the appropriate authorities for criminal investigation, prosecution and to ensure the recovery of illegally obtained funds. If the ANC of Ramaphosa is serious about cracking down on corruption, then they must fully cooperate with the IEC in order for the law to run its course. The DA is committed to bring change that cuts corruption, creates jobs and delivers services to the people of South Africa. In 2019, our people will have the opportunity to exercise their right to choose a Party that has a proven track record of putting the people first. Statement issued by Solly Malatsi MP, DA National Spokesperson, 22 July 2018