#ZimbabweDecides2018: Only credible elections will bring real change to Zimbabwe 29 July 2018 As Zimbabwe heads to the polls tomorrow to elect the next government, the DA encourages all Zimbabweans to exercise their democratic right and go out in their numbers to choose a government that best represents their interests. My colleague and DA Shadow Minister of International Relations and Co-operation, Stevens Mokgalapa MP, is a part of a delegation of observers who will oversee this historic election. The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC), on its part, has a duty to ensure a free and fair electoral process whose outcome must be a true reflection of Zimbabwean’s democratic choice. While the presence of international observers is a welcome development, reports of ZEC’s refusal to be transparent with its processes to ensure fairness together with reports of intimidation of opposition supporters in rural areas by ruling party supporters is a cause for concern. It is vital, therefore, that the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Africa Union (AU) observer missions strictly enforce the SADC Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections in Africa and the AU Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. Failure to do so by the respective missions, will be a betrayal to Zimbabweans who look to these elections as an opportunity to chart a new way forward for their country. The election will be the first litmus test that will determine whether Zimbabwe remains trapped in the dictatorial strongman politics of its former President, Robert Mugabe, or it transitions to an open and democratic society that values the rule of law, respects human rights and creates opportunity for all its citizens. Political players in Zimbabwe must be aware that a credible election is a non-negotiable prerequisite that will guarantee the legitimacy of any government that will be formed after the elections. Any attempt to subvert the will of the people through electoral manipulation will only serve to undermine any effort to rebuild Zimbabwe and restore its status as an equal partner among the community of nations. Zimbabweans have endured the worst economic decline in the SADC region in the past decade, and for any economic revival efforts to be successful, it is essential that only a legitimately elected government emerges victorious after the July 30 elections. Issued by Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA National Spokesperson, 29 July 2018