ANCYL calls on unrepentant Manana to resign from all positions in the ANC and Parliament 9 May 2018 The African National Congress Youth League (ANCYL) is shocked by latest accusations of domestic violence leveled against its former leader and current serving ANC NEC Member, Cde Mduduzi Manana. The ANCYL wishes to join many leading South African voices in condemning the unrepentant behavior of Manana. Manana’s behavior or actions are not only in direct opposite of the ANC’s values, principles and revolutionary morality, but they are unjustifiable, barbaric and inhumane. No individual or persons, irrespective their standing standing or social classification has a right to mete violence against any human being, especially against women and children. Furthermore, Manana’s actions is a reflection of the violent nature of our society, as evidenced by many violent deeds continuously reported and perpetrated by men against women. The ANCYL calls for a Popular Front, involving wide of progressive forces and leading people’s formations across all sections of society to embark on a progressive campaign to deal systematically and decisively with all forms and scourge of violence meted against women and children. The ANCYL calls on Manana to follow his conscience and do the honorable thing, and resign from his positions in the ANC and parliament. His unrepentant actions are harming the image and public standing of the ANC, as a trusted leader and chief representative of popular aspirations of our people. Furthermore, his continued participation in the ANC raises a false narrative in the public eye that the ANC protects or shields those accused (or found) to be at the wrong arm of the law. Undeniably society will remember Manana ‘s actions in the “ballot box” if the ANC does not act decisively. This calls on the ANC to act swiftly and subject Manana before a Disciplinary Hearing so that am appropriate sanction can be imposed on him, even if it means, his membership of the ANC has to be terminated. The ANC can’t afford to turn a blind eye on this matter, given Manana’s leadership position in the ANC, as member of our highest decision making body, the NEC. The ANC at this critical phase should not allow any of it leaders to score “own goals”. If these continues or left unattended No door to door campaign will deliver more votes than acting against Manana. No huge rallies will deliver votes more than acting against Manana. No political address will deliver more votes than acting against Manana. The ANC MUST ACT AND IT MUST NOW. The ANCYL affirms it historical mandate of being a home of all young people, irrespective of their gender parity or creed, and we shall continue to be defenders of the most vulnerable sections in our society. Issued by Mlondi Mkhize, National Spokesperson, African National Congress Youth League, 9 May 2019