DA FedEx meeting resolves to deliberate further on De Lille matter This weekend, the DA's Federal Executive (FedEx) -  the organisation’s highest decision-making body outside of Federal Congress - had its very first meeting following the party's Federal Congress last month where new leadership was elected. The FedEx took this opportunity to make crucial decisions which are important as we head into an election period. Among the matters considered was the Patricia De Lille case following the City of Cape Town caucus decision to move a Motion of No Confidence in Ms De Lille. They had advanced various reasons for why over 70% of the caucus have lost confidence in Ms De Lille as mayor. These reasons included the fact that she had repeatedly breached the Code of Conduct for Councillors as well as the Constitution of the DA, had brought the DA into disrepute, and breached the conditions of her suspension. In addition, Ms De Lille’s conduct in the public domain has amounted to frequent criticisms of the DA and the DA’s management of her case, to the extent that it appears she does not consider herself part of the DA any longer - or at least considers herself more important than it and above the rules of the party, Her recent comment that she is "no longer cooperating with the DA” means she cannot effectively govern on a DA mandate. The FedEx had lengthy deliberations considering all elements of this matter. At all times the Fedex has approached this matter with the highest level of seriousness and thoroughness given the importance of the issues at hand. However, during the course of these deliberations we received legal papers from Ms de Lille advising that she intends approaching the courts. As a result we have suspended discussions pending legal advice. The Fedex will resume discussions early next week once the legal advice is at hand. The Fedex will in the interim continue to impress upon the City of Cape Town caucus to remain focused on ensuring excellence in service delivery to the people of Cape Town. Statement issued by Natasha Mazzone, Deputy Chairperson of Federal Council, 5 May 2018