ANCWL statement on the scourge of gender-based violence 28 May 2018 The African National Congress Women's League (ANCWL) is saddened by high alarming rate of gender based violence in the country and plead with all South Africans to join hands and fight the scourge. It is  alleged that the suspended Commissioner of South African Revenue Services (SARS) Tom Moyane physically assaulted the 17-year-old mother of his baby grandson and also a 19 year old man allegedly hanged two school girls at Stella  Hoërskool  Hostel over the weekend. This must be condemned by all South Africans. The ANCWL respects the principle of innocent until proven guilty, however we are resolute in supporting the victims of violence and wishes to reiterate this position. Mr. Moyane must face the law for alleged assault and the 19 year old man who allegedly hanged the two girls at Stella  Hoërskool  Hostel must face the law on murder charges. South African women, children, gays and lesbians continues to bear the brunt of abuse in the hands of men. It is men against children, men against women, men against gays and lesbians. The African National Congress (ANC)  led government must treat this as a national crisis and national security threat. The ANCWL welcomes the commitment made by the President of the ANC and of South Africa, His Excellency Cyril Ramaphosa during the event to honour Aunt Sophie De Bruyn . The President committed that he will be in the forefront of the fight against gender based violence . The ANCWL calls all members of society to join the President in the forefront. The killings and abuse of girls, women, children, gays and lesbians must be fought by all members of society, political parties, civil society organization, businesses et al. The ANCWL also pleads with the media to also play a critical role in the fight against gender based violence. Radio stations, Television stations and newspapers have a platform that they can use effectively to discourage patriarchy and male chauvinism.  Programs or stories that reinforces the patriarchal practices and objectification of women must be banned from media platforms. Government and business sectors must also avail adequate resources to institutions that promotes respect to gender equality and fight against gender based violence. The ANCWL calls for wheels of justice to move fast in dealing with cases of gender based violence. Issued by Meokgo Matuba, ANCWL Secretary General, 28 May 2018