Supra's exit does not shield him from accounting for NW's collapse 24 May 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West is not misled by the sudden exit of Premier Supra Mahumapelo. While his "early retirement" yesterday is a welcome step torwards building up what the ANC has broken down, the fact remains that the ANC and President Cryil Ramaphosa do not care about the people of the North West. This is all a political game, where Supra still still holds power as the Provincial Chairperson. The fact is that Mahumapho should be held accountable for the scandalous rot under his premiership. According to yesterday's Auditor-General (A-G) report, the North West has collapsed. This province's finances are in shambles with not one of our 22 municipalities receiving a clean audit. According to A-G, Kimi Makwetu, this "again highlights the lack of accountability by municipal management — and other key role players in the province who are responsible for monitoring and assisting local government...". There is no doubt that Mahumaphelo should be held accountable for the poor performance of his subordinates who have, for too long, stolen the people's money. The lack of accountability by Mahumaphelo and his cabal, couple with the non-existence of consequence management have robbed communities of proper service delivery, healthcare, water, and sanitation and opportunities for employment. The deep rot in the province was caused and sustained under the Premiership of Supra Mahumapelo and endorsed the ANC. They should hang their heads in shame. Supra's statement yesterday that there will be "action taken" against officials who are responsible for epic failures such as the Mediosa contract, the mismanagement of the controversial D-account, unauthorized, wasteful, fruitless expenditure and contractors who did not deliver on their agreements, rings hollow. The DA demands that the so-called 22 forensic audits that the ex-Premier now claims have been completed, are tabled for scrutiny and debate in the North West Provincial Legislature. This should have happened a long time ago. Cyril Ramaphosa and many other ANC cadres turned their backs on the North West and for the sake of political expediency turned a blind eye to the collapse caused by Supra Mahumapelo. North West will only heal when Change comes to the province - Change that only the DA can bring in the election next year. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader, 24 May 2018