SPEAKER CONCERNED ABOUT ASSAULT COMPLAINT INVOLVING MR MDUDUZI MANANA Parliament, Wednesday 9 May 2018 – National Assembly Speaker Ms Baleka Mbete is concerned about the latest accusations of physical violence by Member of Parliament Mr Mduduzi Manana – this time allegedly against his domestic worker. Mr Manana remains innocent until proven otherwise. We, therefore, welcome the National Prosecuting Authority’s investigation of the assault complaint which Mr Manana’s domestic worker lodged and trust it will be concluded speedily. The police’s exercising of their responsibility to continue the investigation is commendable – despite Mr Manana’s domestic worker dropping the complaint she initially laid. Violence, especially violence against women and children and the vulnerable in our society, is a scourge which we must combat without compromise. Often the survivors of violence, especially domestic violence, drop complaints which they lodge with the police. This occurs for various reasons. Parliament has a code of ethical conduct for Members of Parliament. The code, intended to provide a framework of reference for Members discharging their duties and responsibilities, outlines the minimum ethical standards of behavior that South Africans expect of their public representatives. These standards include upholding propriety, integrity and ethical values in their conduct. The purpose is to create public trust and confidence. It requires, among others, that Members of Parliament uphold the law and promote and support ethical conduct by leadership and example. We note that last year Mr Manana was convicted of assault and sentenced to a fine of R100 000 or 12 months’ jail, to complete a rehabilitation programme and to carry out 500 hours of community service. His conduct is also a subject of an internal parliamentary inquiry through the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests. In the light of the latest worrying reports regarding Mr Manana’s conduct, the Speaker will advise the committee to also investigate these serious accusations and make a recommendation. Public representatives are expected to carry themselves in a manner befitting their status and office as honourable Members of Parliament, both inside and outside of Parliament. Statement issued by Parliament, 9 May 2018