The Odd Number wins Wimpy by Herman Manson. The Odd Number has been appointed as lead agency for Wimpy following a five-way pitch that included the incumbent agency FCB Africa. Smollan buys into Elevatorby Herman Manson. The experiential and activation agency has sold a majority (50.1%) stake to the retail solutions company. Avatar CT wins H&Mby Herman Manson. Avatar's Cape Town agency has won the integrated agency business for global fashion retailer, H&M, in South Africa. ABC Analysis Q1 2018: The biggest-circulating consumer mags in SAABC Analysis Q1 2018: The biggest-circulating newspapers in SAby Herman Manson. The Audit Bureau of Circulations of South Africa has released consumer-magazine and newspaper circulation statistics for the period January–March 2018 (ABC Q1 2018). #AgencyFocus: Digital is not a commodity — Platinum Seedby Carey Finn. The Cape Town-based UX provider is focused on the role of digital in business growth. Q&A: Odette van der Haar on leaving the ACA for JWTby Herman Manson. We caught up with Odette van der Haar to find out more about her career move. Regular Reads: Cover Stories: - Anxy, Luxe Noir, The Great Discontent, Vogue PT & Wet- The Carnation, MAD, Bon Appétit, Newsweek & Raygun Shelf Life: - Talking ecommerce with Teljoy • Twitter indexes Kiswahili- Hendrick’s Gin ad by Tulips and Chimneys • Freshstop food lines SA TV Ratings: - SA TV Ratings: DStv — primetime top 30 for Apr 2018- SA TV Ratings: SABC 3 — primetime top 20 for Apr, Mar 2018 On the Radar: - Wunderman SA names new MD- Wunderman SA appoints chief strategic officer- Riverbed appoints ECD- Ninety9cents wins new business- BMW, MINI appoint exp agency- We're a new kind of digital agency — Hoorah- #Campaigns: Allan Gray launches heartwarming ad campaign- Seven SA judges for Cannes Lions- Cinemark announces SA's Young Lions to compete at Cannes- One Show: All the South African winners- The One Club’s 2018 ADC winners announced- Loeries deadline extended- New deputy editor for Bona- Sowetan launches new sports section- Little trust in agencies, finds CMS survey Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.