Home Affairs is losing the battle against illegal immigration 24 May 2018 Replies to DA parliamentary questions has revealed  a year on year increase of  16,83% and 11.55% respectively since 2015 in the number of foreign nationals failing to depart from South Africa after the expiration of their visas. In 2015,  approximately 295 000 people stayed in South Africa once their visas have expired, this number increased to roughly 345 000 in 2016 and increased again to 384 000 in 2017. Notably, this number accounts for the total number of persons from only the top 5 countries whose citizens remain in South Africa illegally. Not only is the ANC government failing in its responsibility to curb illegal immigration but it also continuously fails illegal immigrants who want to be processed but can’t because of the continued failings of the Department of Home Affairs to efficiently process applications. It is gravely concerning that there’s no clear plan or capacity to prevent the growth of the illegal immigrant population in South Africa. This is an indictment on the Home Affairs Minister, Malusi Gigaba, and as such, he must held accountable for his utter contempt for his job as a public servant. The Minister needs to change tack and treat his department with the seriousness it deserves. After all he’s here to serve South Africans and the DA expects nothing less. It is totally unacceptable that we have a government that is knowingly compounding the challenges facing the control of illegal immigration in the country. The DA has previously urged the Department of Home Affairs to prioritise the following: - secure our borders and fix our fences, making it almost impossible for people to enter the country illegally; - make it as easy as possible for those who wish to enter legally, with an emphasis on attracting skilled workers; - take stronger action against those who employ illegal immigrants; and - address corruption, inefficiency, capacity constraints in the administration process for refugee or asylum seekers. By implementing the above, a DA government would streamline the current broken, corrupt and overburdened immigration system. Issued by Archibold Figlan, DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, 24 May 2018