#GlebelandsHostel: The conversion of hostels into liveable family units more vital than ever 28 May 2018 Today, on our oversight visit to Glebelands hostel in Umlazi township, south of Durban, the DA engaged with the residents who shared their frustrations with the long wait to receive safe and dignified housing. In addition, our intention was to assess the safety and security’s situation, which the residents reported as being improved since fresh interventions were implemented that brought in the National Intervention Unit and changed the leadership of the Umlazi police station. The aim of our visit was precisely to ascertain the reasons for the stalled progress in converting this violence-torn hostel into liveable and safe family units. The DA also found the worst imaginable living conditions in the hostel, ranging from broken windows to collapsed roofs which haven’t been fixed or replaced by the municipality for over a year. The DA trusts that Premier Willies Mchunu will speedily release the report of the Moerane Commission. The province as a whole, and this particular community, needs the provincial government to treat the issues facing the residents with the seriousness they deserve. Last week Thursday, speaking at the African Renaissance Festival, the President expressed his concern over the political killings in KZN and, evoking the spirit of Nelson Mandela, called for unity. The President needs to do more. He needs to impress upon Premier Mchunu the importance of releasing the report of the Moerane Commission. The public  has a right to know and understand the underlying causes of the violence and the extent to which the neglect of this area by the government has contributed to the escalating violence. The residents of Glebelands hostel are tired of waiting on the long-promised upgrading of the hostel. As their safety, security and right to dignified living conditions hang in the balance, the inaction and the silence of the ANC government speaks volumes of their contempt for the people of Glebelands. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA Shadow Minister of Human Settlements, 28 May 2018