JOINT STATEMENT BY UNIONS IN THE BUS SECTOR ON THE LATEST OFFER 11 MAY 2018  Labour unions in the bus sector, SATAWU, TAWUSA, NUMSA, TOWU and TASWU, have received the latest offer by bus employers to end the four-week long national bus strike. The breakdown of the offer is as follows: - 9% across-the-board wage increase for the first year effective as of date of signature, 11 May 2018 to 31 March 2019 - 8% across-the-board wage increase for the second year, effective as of 1 April 2019 - Minimum basic wage to increase by 9% as of date of signature and 8% as of 1 April 2019 - Allowances including Nightshift, Subsistence, Cross Border and Tool to increase by the respective ATB for both years Matters to be referred to a Task Team The following issues are to be referred to a task team overseen by the Commission of Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) with clear terms of reference and time frames: - Nightshift hours - Dual Driver - Insourcing UNIONS OVERWHELMINGLY REJECT THE OFFER We have consulted our members from all the regions in different parts of the country. Our members have overwhelmingly rejected this offer. This is because the employers in the sector refuse to back date the agreement to be applicable on the 1st of April 2018. The general practice in any sector when on a strike is that the agreement is backdated to reflect the date when the new wage agreement is supposed to take effect, which in this case is the 1st April 2018. Instead, the employers want the agreement to be implemented from the date of signing and this is unacceptable to our members. As unions in the sector we reject the attitude of the employers regarding the effective date of the agreement. We believe that they are provoking our members unnecessarily. We want to end the strike because we recognise that it is in the best interests of our members and the community at large. For everyday that this strike drags on, workers suffer because of the ‘no work, no pay’ policy. THE STRIKE CONTINUES Given the situation, the strike continues until we can reach an agreement on this issue. We will continue to engage with employers and our members to try and find an amicable outcome. We want to thank our members for being disciplined and showing strength of character throughout the strike. They made the ultimate sacrifice by giving up their wages in order to secure these concessions. We also want to extend our gratitude to bus commuters and we continue to ask for their patience. They are suffering with us during this strike, and we are grateful for their support. Aluta continua! The struggle continues! Statement issued by SATAWU, TAWUSA, NUMSA, TOWU and TASWU, 13 May 2018