FS Municipal Collapse: ANC devastation must end 28 May 2018 The two-day briefing to the Public Accounts Committee by the Auditor-General (AG) reads like an obituary to local government in the Free State. The AG confirmed that all Free State municipalities are dysfunctional and need urgent intervention. All municipalities regressed in their audit opinions, whilst four received disclaimers and another five are still to have their annual reports audited and published. In his consolidated report on municipalities tabled in Parliament last week Wednesday, the Auditor-General, Kimi Makwethu, said that the Free State was the worst performing province in South Africa. Irregular expenditure totalled R675 million, the net current liability of municipalities stand at R4 billion, while unauthorised expenditure totalled R2.9 billion and fruitless and wasteful expenditure totalled R324 million for the financial year 2016/17. This state of affairs has been developing for several years, and has been presided over by the ANC and especially the Premier and former MEC of COGTA, Sisi Ntombela. The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the Free State has been extremely concerned about the situation in municipalities and, as a result, the Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) appointed an Ad-Hoc Committee to investigate the situation, the reasons for these failures, and how we can respond and contribute to ensuring better governance and service delivery for the citizens of the province. The report on what we found can be accessed here. It became clear during our investigations and discussions that the failure of a municipality does not happen in isolation, but is enabled by the failure of political leadership, and the failure of authorised and mandated government departments, ministers and authorities to exercise their oversight obligations. Some of the key responsibilities of the municipalities are to ensure good governance for effective use of public resources and create conditions for investment, economic growth, job creation, and elimination of poverty. Given the current state of Free State municipalities, it is not possible to achieve any of these objectives. Service delivery protests, which often turn violent and become the problem of the police, increase as municipalities collapse. There has been a sharp spike in violent service delivery protests in the Free State since the 2016 elections and is a strong indicator of the frustration of residents. The massive debts to Eskom causing electricity interruptions add to the frustration of residents. Paying customers, including manufacturing industries and retail businesses, which rely on sustainable water and electricity supply, are deeply frustrated and struggling to keep their doors open, let alone expand their operations to create more jobs. The Free State is facing a destruction of its economy which will lead to even greater unemployment and poverty levels. The DA believes that it is our responsibility to fight for the rights of all residents, whether they are paying customers, or indigent residents. The municipalities are obliged in terms of the MFMA to ensure the collection of revenue and to ensure that where customers do not pay, their services are terminated. In line with this commitment the DA will do the following: - Strictly monitor financial management in municipalities through the Finance Committees and MPAC; - Lodge complaints with the Human Rights Commission or the Public Protector where relevant; - In cases of criminal activity such as fraud or theft, or unconstitutional actions such as failure to protect the environment or protect water sources, we will bring criminal charges against municipal managers with the SAPS; and - Where a state of collapse is threatening, we will request a provincial intervention by the MEC of COGTA in terms of Sec 139 of the Constitution. The DA welcomes the announcement by the national Minister of COGTA, Dr. Zweli Mkhize, that National Treasury will intervene in some FS municipalities. This is a step in the right direction because provincial interventions have, in the past, not been able to improve governance and basic service delivery. As the DA in the Free State we will continue to monitor municipalities, especially those where various interventions have been announced, and we will continue to use every tool at our disposal to ensure that municipal leadership are held accountable for their failures. While the DA will make use of constitutional mechanisms in a bid to improve governance in the Free State, we will also double our efforts to bring our message of Change to the people of the province. The Free State is on the brink of total collapse, and the province has been brought to this juncture by the ANC. The ANC does not have the will to ensure good governance. The DA on the other hand governs in the interests of all the people, and where we are in government, we have managed to turn the rot of ANC governance around, most recently in Tshwane, Johannesburg and Nelson Mandela Bay. The AG also confirmed that DA-governed municipalities are performing the best on all indicators, as is evidenced in his consolidated report. The DA is ready to bring good governance to the Free State, all that needs to be done is for the people of the province to say enough is enough and use their votes in next year’s election as the catalyst for change. Issued by James Letuka, DA Free State Cogta Spokesperson, 28 May 2018