#SupraMustGo: Placing NW under administration deals with the symptoms not the cause 14 May 2018 The DA in the North West deems President Cyril Ramaphosa's decision to put the North West Provincial Government under national administration as an extremely delayed response to an urgent and serious matter. While placing a province under administration is aimed at restoring stability and ensuring that governance deficits are dealt with, we cannot help but believe that President Ramaphosa is using the Constitution to deal with a political impasse – his lack of support in the ANC to recall Supra Mahumaphelo once and for all. Placing the North West under administration deals with the symptoms not the cause. We are calling on ANC President Ramaphosa to recall Supra Mahumapelo with immediate effect. Supra Mahumapelo has allowed this province to become a gold mine for the connected few while the majority suffer under extreme poverty. Billions of Rands, which should have been directed to service delivery and job creation are unaccounted for. How long will Ramaphosa and the ANC play games while the people suffer? On Friday, the we lodged a Promotion of Access to Information Act of 2000 (PAIA) application to the ensure we get access to the Inter-Ministerial Task Team’s report on the state of affairs in North West. This cannot be another report which gathers dust and is not acted upon; if this happens, it will amount to nothing more than a PR stunt by Ramaphosa. President Ramaphosa should give us a clear indication of the role that MECs and the acting Premier will be playing while the province is under administration. We also call upon the President to reveal what role Mahumapelo will play seeing that he is still the chairperson of the ANC in the North West. The ANC has failed the people  of the North West and we are skeptical that the President's late intervention will turn the province around. North West needs the kind of Change that only a DA-led government can bring. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader, 14 May 2018