Gauteng Education Department failing to deal with sexual assault cases 9 May 2018 Despite having a sexual harassment and assault policy in place, the Gauteng Department of Education is failing to deal with sexual harassment and assault cases in Gauteng schools. This was revealed by the Gauteng Department of Education MEC, Panyaza Lesufi in a written reply to questions tabled in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. According to MEC Lesufi, 120 cases of sexual assault and 3 cases of sexual harassment have been reported to the Department from the 2013/14 to 2017/18 financial years respectively. The following table indicates the total number of incidents of sexual harassment and assault reported:  The sexual assault cases increased in the 2017/2018 financial year and the 22 cases of sexual assault are still under investigation. This indicates that the sexual harassment and assault policy is not being properly implemented. The Department is not doing enough to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to book. In addition, 12 people who have been found guilty of sexual harassment and assault have been suspended without pay, 5 people were made to pay fines, 49 people were dismissed and 15 were issued with written warnings. It is not clear what exactly happened with the 34 individuals who were not found guilty; their cases may have been withdrawn or they retired or resigned or their contract expired. The DA is appealing to MEC Lesufi to speed up the resolution of the cases so that teachers who resign or take early retirement are not exempted from disciplinary action. It has become a norm that these teachers will most likely move to other schools and commit the same offence. MEC Lesufi must continue to engage both teachers and learners on the sexual harassment and assault policy so that they are aware of it and are able to report such incidents without fear. Sexual harassment and assault has absolutely no place in our schools. Issued by Khume Ramulifho, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 9 May 2018