Supra must still be held accountable for looting and collapsing the North West The Democratic Alliance in the North West welcomes the announcement that Supra Mahumapelo will no longer occupy the position of Premier of the North West. This is a step in the right direction of ensuring order and stability in the Province. We are however adamant that Mahumapelo’s transgressions cannot be put to bed merely because he has resigned. He must still be held accountable for the collapse of the North West. Despite his departure, Mahumapelo still needs to be held accountable for his role in a long list of scandals, which include: - The monument in honour of Jacob Zuma – a broken man who now faces corruption charges; - Tenders to the Guptas worth millions while the people of North West suffer without basics like water and electricity; - His open affiliation and proud friendship with the Guptas who is accused of State Capture; - His disrespect for the Parliament of South Africa – swearing at opposition party members; - The Premier flatly refuses to share the damning forensic reports that have been commissioned by his office, pertaining to provincial departments, provincial entities, municipalities, and municipal entities; - Supra’s Youth Entrepreneurship Services (YES) Programme, which is supposed to address one of the highest youth unemployment rates in the country, has allocated the bulk of the Grant to Ngaka Modiri Molema (R2 019 875) and Bojanala Platinum (R1 752 000) municipalities, coincidentally areas where Supra’s personal support base is strongest; - Hospitals and clinics are understaffed and without resources. There are no proper patient transport systems in place; - Towns and cities are falling apart due to no maintenance, due to corrupt spending by government; - Our communities and schools are subjected to bucket toilets and pit toilets still – 24 years into our democracy; and - His open incitement to violence and race division during the Coligny protests. The ANC and Ramaphosa must hang their heads in shame for dragging their feet and accommodating Mahumapelo’s arrogance, all while the province burned and people lost their lives. Whoever the ANC deploys to serve as Premier will continue where Mahumapelo left off – it will be more of the same. It is therefore up to the people of the North West to bring Total Change to the North West by voting for the Democratic Alliance, which has a proud track record of putting the people first by stopping corruption, creating jobs and delivering services. Update: #SupraMustGo: Your move, Ramaphosa The Democratic Alliance in North West calls upon ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa to intervene and save what is left of the North West. Premier Supra Mahumapelo is no longer governing with a mandate from the people but is rather ruling like a dictator. He is being propped up by a self-interested cabal, which is working to loot the people’s money until there is nothing left to steal. The reality is that this is a mess of Ramaphosa, who has accommodated Mahumaphelo’s lies and arrogance. If he had acted swiftly, we would not be here today. The people in North West have spoken and they took to the streets as they want the Premier to step down. Mahumapelo’s clinging to power has resulted in strikes in the province severely affecting businesses, teaching time and the safety of all communities. Healthcare at most hospitals and clinics has come to a complete standstill. There is no medicine available – not even for child immunisations. His mention of political conspiracies and agendas against him is just another way of passing the buck. This is the same tactic deployed by Jacob Zuma during times of pressure. The people are not fooled. His sudden outburst against corruption and poor contractors during a media briefing was amusing – especially taking into consideration that his offices were raided by the Hawks and there are outstanding investigations into corruption against him. As long as Ramaphosa drags his feet and does not recall Mahumapelo, the more the people of North West will suffer. Keeping Supra as the ANC Chairperson in North West will also be an opportunity to still rule from behind the scenes. The ANC and Mahumaphelo have again ignored the voices of the people and we will hold them accountable for any further destruction and losses due to the Supra Power Trip. It is therefore up to the people of the North West to bring Total Change to the North West by voting for the Democratic Alliance, which has a proud track record of putting the people first by stopping corruption, creating jobs and delivering services. Statements issued by Joe McGluwa MPL, DA North West Provincial Leader, 9 May 2018