Seismic incident at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein operations Westonaria 3 May 2018 Sibanye-Stillwater (Tickers JSE: SGL and NYSE: SBGL) regrets to report that following a seismic event at approximately 13:30 this afternoon, which caused a fall of ground in an operating stope at its Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations on the West Rand, 13 employees were unaccounted for. Mine rescue teams were immediately mobilised and three employees have been located and have been interacting with the rescue teams. All efforts are being made to locate the 10 employees who remain unaccounted for, and safely recover all the affected employees. The Department of Mineral Resources and all the unions have been informed and representatives are on site assisting with the rescue efforts. An update will be provided when more information is available. Update: Update on seismic incident at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein operations Westonaria 3 May 2018 Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to report that five of the 13 employees who were trapped following a seismic event at its Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations, have been freed by the mine rescue teams. - Three of the five employees have been returned to surface, one of whom regretfully succumbed to his injuries and has passed away. The other two employees have been transported to hospital and are in a stable condition. - Two of the five freed employees are still being brought to surface and are conscious. Another three employees have been located and are responding to the rescue teams. Management of Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to express its sincere condolences to friends and family of the deceased employee and will continue to make every effort to locate the remaining five employees who are unaccounted for, and return all the employees safely to surface. A further update will be provided when more information is available. Update: Further update on seismic incident at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein operations Westonaria, 4 May 2018 Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to report that 10 of the 13 employees who were trapped following a seismic event (measuring 2.2 on the Richter scale) yesterday, at its Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations, have now been freed, four of which have succumbed to their injuries and passed away. Six employees are in hospital. Another employee have been located, while two employees remain unaccounted for. Management of Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to express its sincere condolences to friends and family of the four deceased employees. We thank everyone involved in the rescue operations since yesterday, especially the proto rescue teams and other stakeholders, who are continuing to make every effort to free and to locate the remaining and unaccounted for employees. Operations at the Masakhane shaft have been suspended. A further update will be provided when more information is available. Update: All employees recovered at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein operations Westonaria, 5 May 2018 Sibanye-Stillwater reports that all 13 of its employees who were trapped underground at its Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations have now been recovered by mine rescue personnel. Regrettably, the last three employees who were recovered, passed away from their injuries, bringing the total number of fatalities as a result of the seismic event, to seven. The six employees who were successfully rescued, are in hospital and are in a stable condition. The families of the employees have been contacted and are receiving necessary support and counselling. The board and management of Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to express its sincere condolences to friends and family of the deceased employees and those impacted by this tragic event. A thorough investigation by management and the Department of Mineral resources (DMR) and other stakeholders will be performed and all efforts will be made to ensure to prevent incidents of this nature occurring in future. We thank everyone involved in the rescue operations, especially the mine rescue teams and our own employees, who have worked tirelessly for the last two and a half days to rescue our colleagues under extremely challenging conditions. Statements issued by Sibanye Stillwater, 3 to 5 May 2018