THE ANC NEC STATEMENT ON THE OUTCOME OF THE ANC GREATER KWADUKUZA ELECTIVE CONFERENCE AND STATE OF READINESS FOR UPCOMING REGIONAL AND PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE 6 May 2018 INTRODUCTION The African National Congress congratulates the Greater KwaDukuza Region for the Regional Elective Conference that was held from the 4th to the 6th of May 2018 at the Meander Manor Hotel in Salt Rock, which was highly successful and adhered to the ANC constitution and specified conference, in line with the rules. All necessary steps were taken to ensure a credible outcome following the adoption of credentials. All processes leading to the nomination and eventually the election of the officials and regional executive committee were characterized by generally notable discipline and adherence to conference rules. The elected Regional Executive Committee is expected to provide the much needed leadership to unite and continue to build a formidable and effective ANC in the Greater KwaDukuza Region and deliver decisive victory at the upcoming 2019 general elections. The NEC and Provincial Interim Committee (PIC) members who were deployed to attend the Conference were impressed by the diligence with which the delegates participated in the various commissions. The policy resolutions that emerged indicate an understanding that the implementation of Radical Socio-Economic Transformation (RET) has to be practical and driven by the needs of our people on the ground. The strong emphasis on strengthening local government structures, with specific reference to building strong and service delivery orientated municipalities, is warmly applauded. We are confident that the elections overseen by an independent electoral agency were free and fair. The elected officials from the 7th Greater KwaDukuza Regional conference are as follows: Cde Ricardo Njabulo Mthembu- Chairperson Cde Khonzuyise Goodman Ngidi - Deputy Chairperson Cde Musa Zondi - Secretary Cde Zibuyile Matozi Khuzwayo-Dlamini - Deputy Secretary Cde Thulani Ntuli – Treasurer This is the first successful conference convened by the National Executive Committee elected by the 54th National Conference at Nasrec. This conference was meeting at a home of our legends among others, King Shaka, former ANC President Cde Albert Luthuli, Cde General Gizenga Mpanza, Cde Jonny Makhathini whom we are already honouring through the revolutionary pilgrimage led by the national officials. STATE OF READINESS FOR OTHER REGIONAL ELECTIVE CONFERENCES AND PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE In KwaZulu-Natal we have eight more regional elective conferences to be convened. These regions have met the criteria to proceed with the conferences in the next few weeks. The regions that will convene conferences are: Emalahleni, Far North, Musa Dladla, Moses Mabhida, Abaqulusi, Inkosi Bhambatha, Lower South Coast and Harry Gwala. These regions have convened the BGMs and are now meeting the 70 percent threshold required to convene their regional conferences and elect new regional leadership. This will be in accordance with the decision to approve the convening of conferences in regions and provinces have fulfilled the requisite processes for the hosting of such conferences. For this province the NWC, after consultations with structures in all regions agreed that preparations for the regional and provincial conferences are on track and that all these conferences should proceed. In this regard, there are regional conferences scheduled for the coming weekend. The provincial conference should proceed in the next few weeks. The ANC has the responsibility to prepare for the upcoming 2019 general elections, therefore it is imperative to conclude convening all the conferences not just in KZN but in the whole country. Statement issued by Cde Pule Mabe, ANC National Spokesperson and Mhlabunzima Memela, ANCKZN MLO, 6 May 2018