COSATU KZN on the Political Killings in KwaZulu Natal 15 May 2018 COSATU in the Province expresses its deepest concern about the continued and unabated killing of comrades and politicians in and around our communities in the province. We send our condolences to the families and colleagues of those that have perished under the merciless hands of assassins. We also urge the law enforcement agencies to work tirelessly to investigate and arrest these perpetrators. We are concerned about this continued scourge of politically motivated killings, as we speak we have bodies of comrades lying cold in mortuaries while others were just buried in the past weekends. We have lost comrades like Cde S’fiso Cele from Lower South Coast, Cde Musawenkosi ‘Maqatha’ Mchunu from Pietermaritzburg who was gunned at Kwa Pata and numerous other comrades who have perished in a similar fashion such as Cde Sindiso Magaqa in UMzimkhulu. They are many comrades who died before and after the local government elections. These killings can be blamed to the persisting factionalism in the movement in particular, especially in the build up to branch, regional and provincial conferences. We also strongly believe that corruption and maladministration in provincial state departments and municipalities is also responsible for these murderers. We have noted that the Moerane Commission appointed by the Premier of KZN to investigate the killings has just concluded its work but we are worried that  such Commissions have produced outcomes that are not prudently implemented. South Africa risks becoming a ‘banana republic’ if our state institutions such as the Police, the intelligence and judiciary, continue to fail the people. These institutions are funded heavily with taxpayer’s monies and they need to do more than they are doing. The heads of these institutions must account to the public on why they should be retained while failing on their mandates. As COSATU in the Province, we are seriously unhappy and feel that not enough is being done and this will result in people losing trust in the law and taking the law into their own hands. Families of comrades, including children who are today orphans have not found closure about what happened to their loved ones. To deal with this scourge, we need to strongly condemn the arrogance and attitude of today’s politicians that is driven by greed and petty politics of personalities. The top six leadership of the ANC needs to do more than make promises but we need to see action. National Officials have decided to descend to our province to address this issue. We therefore wish to reiterate our call that the leadership must show commitment in terms of addressing factions in the movement. Leaders must practice what they preach. The government must start a process of cleaning up the law enforcement agencies in the province and remove compromised and corrupt heads of these institutions. The Moerane Commission findings must be released urgently, in order for necessary action to be taken and to give confidence to our people that there’s hope for restoring peace and safety in our Province. Government must show seriousness in dealing with the scourge of corruption, bribery, patronage, looting and maladministration. It is also our strong considered view as per our previous submission that the unity process must first find expression and resonance with the people on the ground, this is a proper healing process. This must include dealing with the issue of marginalized comrades through gate-keeping of membership, manipulation of organizational systems and processes, ensuring that all comrades do feel equal and welcomed to participate in the building and shaping of our society. Issued by Edwin Mkhize, Provincial Secretary, COSATU KZN, 15 May 2018