MEC Lesufi Instructs Parktown Boys High SGB to review their Code of Conduct 8 May 2018 The MEC for Education, Mr. Panyaza Lesufi, today 08 May 2018, visited Parktown Boys to report on the outcome of investigation into allegation of secondary victimisation. The MEC implored learners to break the culture of silence and speak out against any violation and report cases without any fear of being victimised. In addition, the MEC instructed the School Governing Body to review the School Code of Conduct, to stipulate clear procedure for reporting and managing incidents of abuse and other matters. An investigation was conducted at the school following complaints from some parents that learners were being victimised by some educators. Among others the following were investigated: - Four (4) educators implicated in allegations of racism, two (2) employed by the department and two (2) by the School Governing Body (SGB). The said educators will be on precautionary suspension from the school before the end of this week. A disciplinary hearing will be held at a later stage. - There was an allegation that learners were smeared with deep heat on their private parts. No evidence was found, we strongly believe that the culture of silence might have played a major role. - On allegations that learners were compelled to use the same blade to shave, a new process must be implemented with immediate effect to avert such unhygienic practices. -Furthermore, there was also an allegation that strippers were brought to the school hostel night parties, of which no evidence was found. The culture of silence in the school impeded the gathering of evidence. The MEC has strongly criticised the sale of alcohol in the school environment and has advised that the Liquor license granted to the Bar be revoked. The Bar is located within the school precinct. There must be clear division of roles and responsibilities between the Department, SGB, the School Management Team and the Foundation. This will ensure that the lines are not blurred between the Foundation and the SGB specifically. The MEC announced that the process of appointing a new Principal has been completed and he will commence on 1 June 2018. “We are on course to protect public education. Any person who wants to tarnish the image of the school will be dealt with accordingly.  Learners must be protected, educators must teach and not violate learners or commit any misconduct. All learners must be treated equally and their dignity protected in our institutions. Any form of discrimination and abuse would not be tolerated”, said MEC Lesufi. Issued by Steve Mabona, Spokesperson, Gauteng Department of Education, 8 May 2018