Free State government collapse reflected in rampant unemployment 31 October 2018 The collapse of governance in the Free State at provincial and municipal levels contributes significantly to the high unemployment in the province. The Statistics South Africa Labour Force Survey for the third quarter of 2018 (July - Sept) indicates that the Free State has the highest increase in unemployment in the country. Unemployment is currently at 36,3% and if discouraged job seekers are included (expanded definition) this increases to 41,5%. The most job losses year on year were in the construction (-9000), trade (-37 000), transport (-16 000), financial (-4000), community and social services (-1000) and agricultural (-1000) sectors. Increases in employment were experienced in the mining (+6000) and manufacturing (+11 000) sectors and private households (+4000). "The poor audit outcomes of both the provincial government and municipalities are indicative of the administrative and financial decay in the Free State. This has impacted negatively on their abilities to deliver the most basic of services" says Kopane. "Healthcare has declined and nothing has been done to stem the 60% pre-grade 12 drop-out rate of learners from schools. Basic service delivery such as sustainable supplies of clean water, sewerage networks, waste management, infrastructure maintenance and payment to Eskom are luxuries for residents of all municipalities. "This has had a devastating impact on local economies that are unable to attract investment and struggle to sustain existing economic activities". Most rural towns in the province are dependent on the province’s one million social grant beneficiaries. In addition, there are limited and declining tax bases in all municipalities. Municipalities continue to spend money on non-essential items such as exorbitant salaries for managers, vehicles and overseas trips for politicians and officials. It is evident that the ANC-run government is unable to stem the tide of unemployment and poor governance. Corruption and financial mismanagement has eroded our provincial economy which has impoverished our people. The people of the Free State must take responsibility for their electoral choices. Where in government, the DA has a track record of creating an enabling environment for employment creating investment. This is evident in the fact that last year 75% of all new jobs in South Africa emanated from the DA-run Western Cape. Only the DA can bring change that builds One South Africa for All by opening fair access to real, long-term jobs. Issued by Patricia Kopane, DA Free State Premier Candidate, 31 October 2018