Police Committee concerned by use of firearms in violent crimes 22 October 2018 The Portfolio Committee on Police is seriously concerned by the violent crimes committed with firearms that are possibly illegal, and calls on the police to fast-track investigations. Four people were shot and killed in two separate incidents over the weekend in Cape Town, including a ward councillor for Bloekombos. Another councillor was shot and killed last week in Umlazi, KwaZulu-Natal. In May this year, the portfolio committee in a media statement recommended that the police prioritise five steps, in order to effectively deal with the proliferation of illegal firearms: 1. Channel more resources to the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation’s specialised unit   focussing on illegal firearms. 2. Implement more projects and network operations initiated by crime intelligence to deal with gun smuggling by criminal syndicates. 3. Enforce stricter control measures in South African Police Services (Saps) stores and stations, and also in the arms supply of the South African National Defence Force. 4. Ensure closer cooperation with other South African Development Community countries to deal with the proliferation and inflow of high calibre automatic firearms in the region. 5.  Conduct a full-scale review of the Firearms Registry turn-around strategy and a forensic audit of high-risk areas in the licencing of firearms, as well as permits and authorisations. The committee is concerned by the steady growth in the illegal firearm pool. More than 800 firearms were stolen from police stations and members of the public in the 2017/18 financial year. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, has called on gun-owning individuals and law-enforcement agencies to ensure that firearms are stored safely at all times. He extended heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased and called for thorough investigations and the arrest of the perpetrators. Issued by Justice Molafo, Media Officer, Portfolio Committee on Police, 22 October 2018