#UDM asks #Hawks head, re @HeraldPE article on @MongameliB, to please explain what is going on @ #NelsonMandelaBay. What is relationship btw Hawks and Herald? #PoliticalShenanigans Dear Sir ALLEGATIONS IN HERALD AGAINST NELSON MANDELA BAY MAYOR MONGAMELI BOBANI 1. I refer to the above matter and address this letter to you in consequence of the front-page article in today’s Herald with the heading “Why the Hawks swooped on Bobani” 2. I have read the above article detailing information about an alleged criminal matter being investigated against Nelson Mandela Bay Mayor Mongameli Bobani and noted the allegations that the Hawks Provincial spokesperson, Captain Anelisa Feni said “the matter was still under investigation” and “Therefore, we are unable to release information.” 3. I fully agree with the stance of your provincial spokesperson. However, a detailed version of contents on an alleged “bombshell affidavit” of Captain Henk Fourie, the Hawks investigator, was published in the article allegedly detailing how “hundreds of thousands of rands were paid into the account of Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Mongameli Bobani by a company accused of siphoning money meant for the city’s beleaguered bus system.” 4. No doubt the allegations are of an utmost serious nature and “form part of the Hawks investigation into fraud, corruption and money laundering involving Bay municipal officials, politicians and businesses” between April 2014 and May 2015. 5. The notice also makes mention of a secret “Deloitte Forensic Report” and I am of the opinion that Mayor Bobani is being tried in the media and I believe that the documents in possession of the Hawks was deliberately shared with Herald for publication and to advance the objectives of certain political parties to the prejudice of Mayor Bobani who has the constitutional right, as a suspect, to be regarded innocent until being found guilty by a Court of Law. 6. In addition to the above and to prove my point, the names of municipal officials, politicians and businesses (except a certain Mr Fareed Fakir) are withheld without reason, despite being said they were involved in the commission of the alleged offences. 7. I request an investigation and explanation from the Hawks as to how a confidential investigation affidavit was made available to Herald contrary to the provincial spokesperson’s views that the Hawks are unable to releases information. 8. Kindly also furnish my office with a copy of the affidavit and explain the relationship between your office and Herald. 9. Whilst I do not condone any acts of impropriety, I question that the information was shared with Herald prior to judicial processes taking place, especially since Mayor Bobani alleges that the Hawks failed to take a statement from him. 10. My understanding of the criminal process is that guilt is determined through the criminal justice system after having had regard to the evidence presented during that process and not by the media stuffing up investigative endeavours at the cost of our justice system. 11. I will deal with the irregular publication by Herald on receipt of your reply to this letter. Mr BH Holomisa President of the United Democratic Movement Issued by Bantu Holomisa via Facebook, 29 October 2018