Alarming that government is saying: “Part with your guns” - Solidarity 18 October 2018 “A disarmed citizenry is left completely defenceless, and this while the right to protect one’s own life is an absolute and non-negotiable right. We dare not give an inch in this regard. The time has come for us to insist on normality in an unflinching and brazen manner”. Thus says Solidarity Research Institute (SNI) Head Connie Mulder, in response to a document which is believed to be an amendment bill. The trade union also announced that it would soon launch a major campaign to fight this document tooth and nail by means of mass support, petitions and by creating international awareness. The document envisages that sections 13 and 14 of the Firearms Control Act (No 60 of 2000), which specifically allow for the use of firearms for self-defence, be scrapped. According to Mulder, this proposal is incredibly problematic as it is. “Citizens’ right to defend their own lives is something that is fundamental to a society. In South Africa with our absurd levels of violent crime it is simply outrageous to want to restrict citizens’ right to life,” Mulder cautioned. “Although there may well be questions about the status of the document, it is painfully clear to us that it is a proposed amendment bill, even though, technically, it might not be one yet. If a thing looks like a duck, smells like a duck and flies like a duck – then it is a duck even it is not swimming on a pond at that very moment,” Mulder cautioned.In addition, to argue that the high levels of violent crime and firearm-related crime will be addressed by disarming citizens, is proof of the fact that the authors of this amendment are far removed from reality. Despite strict firearm laws, violent crime levels in South Africa are excessively high. The idea that greater regulation of firearms will tackle the violent crime problem had its roots in a PowerPoint presentation rather than in a police report,” Mulder said. If we only wanted to talk about firearm legislation, this idea was already problematic. Within the context of several communist policies that the ANC wants to present and implement in 2018, such as expropriation without compensation and the National Health Insurance, this amendment bill is extremely alarming,” Mulder explained. “We won’t leave it at that. This is where one draws the line. A government should fear its citizens, not the other way around,” Mulder said. Issued by Connie Mulder, Head: Solidarity Research Institute, 18 October 2018