Does Nhlanhla Nene still have the “full support” of President Cyril Ramaphosa? We now know [see here] that President Cyril Ramaphosa was informed about Minister of Finance Nhlanhla Nene’s meetings with inter alia Ajay Gupta at Saxonwold despite being suspicious of the family’s intentions, and allegations surrounding investments by the Public Investment Corporation that may have benefited his son, Siyabonga Nene, before he provided his evidence to the Zondo Commission. However, despite being informed prior to evidence being provided, and despite the evidence being provided several days ago to the Zondo Commission, President Cyril Ramaphosa has up until now maintained his silence on this matter. The minister himself pointed out in his evidence before the Zondo Commission that: “… the Minister of Finance has weighty responsibilities and often has to make unpopular decisions taking into account the long-term fiscal sustainability and economic interests of the country. It is this office that drives the budget process, approves loans and guarantees, oversees compliance with financial management and procurement processes and is the final bulkwark against corrupt dealings that jeopardise public finances. That is why the optimal relationship is for the Minister of Finance to have the full support of the President at all times.” The question that President Cyril Ramaphosa now needs to answer is whether the minister still has his “full support”, and he needs to answer the question before the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement is presented in Parliament. We simply cannot afford the uncertainty that would surround what would effectively be a “lame duck” finance minister, who may, or may not, have the full support of the president, and who may stay, or may go, ahead of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement in Parliament. I have, in any event, forced President Cyril Ramaphosa’s hand by submitting a parliamentary question to the president probing whether the finance minister: disclosed any information contained in his evidence prior to his appointment and/or prior to providing evidence to the Zondo Commission; offered to resign prior to providing evidence to the Zondo Commission; and has the full support of the president in the light of his obligation in terms of Section 96 of the Constitution. It is now time for President Cyril Ramaphosa to step up and break his silence, and tell us whether Nhlanhla Nene has his full support ahead of the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement being presented in Parliament. Statement issued by David Maynier MP, DA Shadow Minister of Finance, 7 October 2018