Ministers Schäfer and Grant appeal to metrorail and taxi associations to assist with learner transport for NSC exams 16 October 2018 Yesterday, thousands of matric candidates across the province began writing the 2018 National Senior Certificate examinations. Many of these candidates rely solely on public transport to make it to their examination venue each day. With on-going reports of Metrorail trains being delayed, cancelled or set alight, it is a concern that there is a possibility that some Matric candidates will not reach their examination venues on time. We, as the Ministers for Transport and Public Works and Education, have discussed these concerns and appeal to all public transport operators to assist us in ensuring that candidates get to their exam centres on time. We sincerely hope that we will have their support, and the support of other road users and communities, during this very important time for our matric learners. Candidates may be admitted into an examination room provided they arrive within one hour of the exam starting – however, a learner arriving within the one-hour period will still have to complete the exam by the same time as other candidates. I.e. if there is a 3-hour exam and a candidate arrives 30 minute late, then the candidate will have only 2 and half hours to complete the examination. Arriving late will ultimately put the candidate at a disadvantage. A candidate arriving later than one hour will not be allowed to write the examination at all and will have to make use of the supplementary examinations next year in June. “I encourage our matric candidates to be mindful of the fact that public transport can be unreliable and to ensure that they leave home earlier so as to make up for any possible delays. Rather be at the venue early than risk being late” said Minister Schafer. “I am appealing to all of our public transport partners, SANTACO, Metrorail, Golden Arrow Bus Services (GABS) and MyCiti, to take the necessary steps to ensure that scholars traveling to and from their examinations are not disrupted in any way during this crucial time. Recent unrest within the Cape public transport network has been detrimental to commuters. We must work together to prevent any unnecessary disruption to our learners during this time. We are committed to working closely with our partners to provide the necessary support to make sure that no scholar is prejudiced. Parents and learners must make use of the available avenues to report delays that may threaten their getting to their examinations on time” said Minister Grant. “For information on all public transport, commuters can call the Transport for Cape Town Information Centre on 0800 65 64 63 (Toll-free from a landline) where trained consultants will assist. This is a 24-hour call centre. They can also contact www.capemetrorail.co.za or www.gometro.mobi or on twitter @CapeTownTrains for train schedules and updates,” said Minister Grant. Issued by Jessica Shelver, Spokesperson for Minister Debbie Schafer, Ministry for Education, Western Cape Government, 16 October 2018