DA ousts failing ANC’s Matlosana mayor with MONC Yesterday, Thursday 25 October 2018, the Democratic Alliance (DA) in Matlosana succeeded in ousting the failing ANC’s Matlosana Executive Mayor, ME Kgaile, through the Motion of No Confidence (MONC) which passed with 44-0 votes. Under Mayor Kgaile’s leadership, Matlosana has regressed significantly on key performance indicators and in delivering quality services to residents. The Mayor and his administration had repeatedly failed to address mounting service delivery challenges raised by community members. On a daily basis, residents have to endure erratic water supplies, refuse removal and travelling on dangerous potholed roads. The Mayor’s tenure was marked by scandals allegations of impropriety. Last year, she made headlines when it was revealed that her official vehicle was written off in an accident as a result of sending her driver to run personal errands in Johannesburg. R500 000 was wasted on a hoax international investors’ conference. Even worse, her administration has not submitted financial reports since 1 July 2017 and the service accounts for residents are in total chaos. It was unfortunate that Cllr Tonie Meiring, from IRASA, refused to participate in this democratic process but rather chose to excuse himself, clearly failing on his mandate to represent our communities in council. Last week the Provincial Treasury revealed that the city had incurred at least R3.9 billion in unauthorised, irregular and wasteful expenditure in the 2017/2018 financial year. The public has expressed their anger frustration over the Mayor’s inability to oversee a proper and transparent management in awarding tender contracts, her wasting of taxpayers’ money, the total negligence of certain areas and her inability to attend to issues reported to her office. The lack of job creation as a result of poor management of finances and corruption of projects has led to several protests in the Pienaarsdorp, Jouberton and Khuma areas. To date, memorandums of grievances that were submitted remain unanswered. The failing ANC has failed residents of Matlosana and they have made it clear that they are now ready for change. In 2019, the DA commits itself to implement a programme for the delivery of quality basic services that will restore their dignity and access to opportunities. Statement issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 26 October 2018