Fuel price leaves the youth vulnerable – Solidarity Youth 3 October 2018 Solidarity Youth today launched a campaign in which its members, as well as members of the public, can express their dismay at the rising fuel price. This campaign was launched in the wake of the recent petrol price hike that affects millions of South Africans, and will leave the youth in South Africa particularly vulnerable. This comes after Solidarity Youth had addressed a letter to Energy Minister Jeff Radebe in which they conveyed their concern and dissatisfaction with the matter to the minister. According to Solidarity Youth Co-ordinator Paul Maritz, Solidarity Youth currently represents the interests of 3 800 members, the majority of whom are learners, students and young people in the workplace. Maritz also said there could be no doubt that the high fuel price of R17,09 per litre inland that applies as of today, will have a hugely adverse effect on the South African economy as a whole, and he was convinced that young people would be hardest hit. Solidarity Youth is concerned about the impact the high fuel price will have on companies and employers. Increased fuel costs will mean that companies will be in a less favourable position to create new jobs in 2019, resulting in fewer job opportunities for young people. As it is, the unemployment rate among persons aged between 15 and 24 is already higher than 53% in South Africa, which is four times higher than the global norm of 13% for people in this age category. In the letter Solidarity Youth calls on the minister to lower the fuel levy of R5,30 which government currently imposes, in a bid to accommodate consumers as soon as possible, so young people could have certainty about a stable future in which job opportunities remain a possibility. “I am concerned that the lower standard of living which young people will experience as a result of higher costs will also lead to young South Africans emigrating in increasing numbers as the gap between the living standards they will experience in South Africa and the standard of life in other countries will increase. In the process, the services of especially skilled experts will be lost to the country,” Maritz said. Solidarity Youth’s campaign includes a petition to the Minister of Energy and a social media awareness campaign which will give consumers an opportunity to express their dismay. Solidarity Youth gave the minister’s office until 10 October 2018 to respond to the letter. Issued by Paul Maritz, Co-ordinator, Solidarity Youth, 3 October 2018