Failing ANC costs emerging farmers millions of rands 2 October 2018 The Democratic Alliance in the North West has lodged a complaint with the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) after the Naledi Local Municipality’s incessant failure to attend to the raw sewage spillage in Huhudi, which has cost emerging farmers millions of rands in dead livestock. During an oversight inspection in June 2018, the DA found the sewage treatment plant in total disrepair. This appalling state of neglect results in the continuous discharge of untreated sewage into the Blesbok Spruit, which in turn flows into the Vaal River – exceeding the legal limits for sewer discharge. The high levels of E.coli found in the water discharging from an incomplete pipeline, subjects the livestock to contamination, leading to high mortality rates and also contaminating the grazing. The sewage spillage has been ongoing for more than ten years, costing an emerging farmer from Huhudi over R2 million in livestock losses. This is a classic illustration of the ANC’s indifference towards the people of this province. After investigating the matter, the Department of Rural, Environment and Agricultural Development (READ) confirmed that the deaths of animals have been caused by worm infestation; acknowledging that animals have drowned in a sewage pond on this farm. Subsequent to a letter written to the Naledi Municipality in June this year, the Municipal Manager, Tshepo Bloom, conceded that the existing sewage pipes are not conducive and that bigger pipes are needed. He then promised that such a project will be completed by July 2018, which never came to pass. The DA has again written to MEC for Local Government and Human Settlements, Fenny Gaolaolwe, requesting her to urgently make good on her promise to release the funds necessary to stop the sewage from flowing into the river. We also got no response despite the fact the we laid criminal charges with the South African Police Station against the Naledi Council. This lack of political will not only exposes them as the personification of empty promises but also indicates their little regard for the laws of this country. The emerging farmers of North West need a supportive government, a government with economic development and food production in mind. Under a DA-led government, farmers will receive the support they deserve in order to ensure food security and improve the quality of life for all. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 2 October 2018