Failing ANC still puts a lid on Supra’s state-sponsored privileges 29 October 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West will ask questions to the Minister of Home Affairs Malusi Gigaba in the National Assembly about the privileges Supra Mahumapelo allegedly still enjoys after he was replaced as Premier. We are not convinced or satisfied by the evasive answer we received (see here), following our formal, written questions to the current Premier Job Mokgoro. We enquired specifically whether Mahumapelo has travelled with his official passport after the failing ANC has kicked him out of office. The Ministerial Handbook clearly states that if you are no longer in office you have to hand in your official passport. Official passport holders in some cases enjoy more relaxed visa conditions and other travel privileges. We received no clear confirmation that Mahumapelo indeed handed in the official passport. It is further worrying that our questions also revealed that he still continues to enjoy special security protection. It was confirmed in the answer that he still benefits protection as stipulated: Security Protection 3.1. In exceptional cases, security protection may be afforded to former Members who have left their official residences for as long as the Minister for Safety and Security may deem this necessary. We will now send follow-up questions to Premier Mokgoro on the so-called “exceptional case” and the cost of this perk. Our communities are crime ridden and live in fear but the disgraced Premier enjoys special protection. Mahumapelo is still protected by the failing ANC despite his huge share in the total collapse of North West. His lack of political will to change the lives of communities, his open affiliation with corrupt cadres and inability to bring jobs and growth should not be rewarded. It is a slap in the face of each person who suffer without a job, proper housing, no service delivery and who was a victim of crime or who are exposed to our disgraceful health and education systems. Only a DA-led government can bring the real change our communities deserve and build One South Africa For All. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 29 October 2018