EFF statement on working conditions at Bidvest workers at OR Tambo 22 October 2018 The EFF is appalled by the working conditions for the workers at BidVest in the OR Tambo International Airport. On his way to Kigali, Rwanda, the CIC Julius Malema was convened by workers who told him of the painful slave conditions under which they work; cheap labour, no medical aid benefits, abuse and general disregard of human dignity. Old women in painful tears, cried as they told story after story of abuse at the hands of BidVest managers. One of the workers earns R7000 per month, despite having worked for this company for over 20 years. With an injury on her knee, one that she sustained at work, she continues to work without any medical assistance. Majority of the workers in this company earn just over R3,OOO without any benefits. The workers are even refused the decency of leave when family members or next of kin passes on. The CIC also heard about the chef who is not allowed to taste the food she cooks. Even when she wants to drink water in her hot kitchen, she is not permitted to. Like all other workers, she is surveilled through cameras that are placed everywhere they work. They are treated like criminals in a prison, convicted of theft they never committed. The workers only eat four slices of bread per 9 hour working day. If they eat more, they face disciplinary action, the ultimate of which is to lose their jobs. When they sustain any injuries, they are given R20 which they must pay back. This R20 is to take public transport to the nearest townships from the O.R. Tambo Airport, and not particularly for any medical help. BidVest is essentially in direct contravention of the spirit and letter of our labour laws and the constitution. It treats these black workers with the same disdain and disregard that existed in slave plantations and the apartheid workplace. Trade Unions have also abandoned these workers. Even when certificates for taking to picket lines and down-tools for better working conditions have been issued, the unions do not lead workers to strike. Workers are therefore essentially on their own, without anyone to help them fight against the tyranny of BidVest managers. We call on BidVest to end its abuse of workers. We call on them to give workers due compensation, including for injuries sustained at the workplace. They must end the intrusive surveillance and allow chefs to eat the food they cook, drink company water and do so in the same kitchens they work in. We will be initiating a meeting with the managers of BidVest to not only discuss these conditions, but to ensure they end them once and for all. Issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 22 October 2018