Keith Rose — tribute by Graham Warsop by MarkLives. A speaker at Keith Rose's Cape Town memorial service, Graham Warsop recalls his first meeting with Rose in 1988 and tracks key aspects of the film director’s career and achievements, and the impact on the South African commercials industry since. #AgencyFocus: O’Brian — when David competes with Goliathby Sabrina Forbes. This is a story of enterprise in a time of political and economic transformation, and highlights how good, solid, quality work far outreaches a fancy name or group title. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Austin Malemaby Veli Ngubane. Austin Malema may have become South African hip-hop’s most sought-after photographer but there’s so much more to the man. #Marketers: Carmen Mohapi, marketing director, Heineken SAby Julie Pughe-Parry. Carmen Mohapi doesn’t believe that the rise of craft beer poses much of a threat to the traditional beer brands. #Immersion: John Mwanza, Dentsu Aegis Network Zambiaby Moonga Mkandawire. John Mwanza chats about give and take, opportunities, the Zambian digital TV market, and more.  Regular Reads Media Design: John Coltrane — 1963, Pansy, Phases, WURMMarket Research Wrap: Media Inflation Watch reveals declining exposureSA TV Ratings: DStv — primetime top 30 for Sep 2018 On the Radar New ad agency for Graham BeckParlotones appoints agency2018 MMA SA Smarties finalists2018 Assegai Awards finalists Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.