Elections 2019: “Fight Back” against corruption and incompetence says FF Plus The time has come to draw a line in the sand and take a stand against corruption and the incompetent government of South Africa that lead the country to the brink of an economic disaster. Therefore, the FF Plus's election message to the people of South Africa is that we cannot afford to wait any longer as the country must be saved from utter ruin. Today, Dr Pieter Groenewald, leader of the FF Plus, addressed a packed hall at the St. George's Park Cricket Stadium in the Eastern Cape and conveyed the message loud and clear: things cannot go on like this. Consequently, the party's theme for next year's general elections is: "Fight Back. Now or Never". South Africa is on the verge of an economic collapse, crime is out of control and the unemployment rate has reached a critical point, particularly among the youth where it is already a national disaster. More than 17 million people are dependent on social grants, property rights are under threat and service delivery has basically come to a standstill. This disturbing list, which is the ANC's doing, gets longer by the day and it is a tragedy because South Africa is a beautiful country with beautiful people. The ingredients for success are there, but the ANC has only managed to cook up disaster. The FF Plus has always been committed to reaching out along with the majority of well-meaning South Africans to offer help and to create prosperity in the country and the party is still willing to cooperate on the road to success. However, we have come to a fork in the road and the ANC can no longer be permitted to continue on its course of destruction and the hand of reconciliation cannot be held out indefinitely. Voters have the right to draw a line in the sand and to line up behind a leader who says: Fight Back against expropriation without compensation. Fight Back against crime. Fight Back against corruption, misappropriation and excessive taxes and tariffs. Fight Back against discrimination. Fight Back against poor service delivery. With this, the FF Plus also wants to bring a message of hope. There certainly are enough South Africans who want to live in a prosperous and progressive country. Who want to build up and not break down. The ideal can be achieved if all these people would join hands and stand together as one to make it clear that the line has been drawn and that a government that is letting its people down and squandering tax money will no longer be tolerated. Take the FF Plus's hand and walk with us on the road to a workable South Africa. Register and cast your vote in the next election. That is how voters can show that they are fighting back against an incompetent government. We cannot afford to waste any more time. Fight Back. It is Now or Never. Statement issued by Dr. Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 13 February 2018