School safety: violence escalating in North West schools 1 October 2018 Following a DA oversight inspection in Zeerust it has become clear that there is a rising trend of violence within school premises. I will therefore be tabling questions in the North West Provincial Legislature to obtain answers from the MEC for Education, Sello Lehari, on specific interventions that the Department is implementing to protect teachers and students from this escalating culture of violence. The DA was informed that at Rearabiloe Secondary School in Lehurutse near Zeerust teachers were attacked during the assembly by a group of learners who were allegedly under the influence of drugs. Two teachers who survived the attack informed the DA that no criminal charges were opened against the perpetrators of the assault against them. The DA is also concerned that there was no trauma counselling provided to teachers following the attack. At Ngotoane Secondary School teachers informed the DA that a collapsed school fence makes it easy for intruders to walk into school premises unregulated. See photos hereand here. During the safety inspection to schools the DA met teachers who were protesting against the failure of the North West Department of Education, teachers expressed fears for their safety and the possible effect school violence may have on them resigning from the teaching profession. Please see photo here Following the tragic killing of a teacher who was allegedly killed by a learner at Ramotshere Secondary School, social worker services were restored at the school. Whilst the DA welcomes the immediate once-off traumatic support offered to learners and teachers immediately after the killing of the teacher it is concerning that there has been a withdrawal of regular visits by social workers at the school. The social workers’ support to schools was withdrawn since the beginning of the year due to a prolonged strike by Nehawu affiliated social workers. All the schools that the DA visited indicated that even though schools have learner codes of conduct, the Department of Education has not acted to ensure that learners and parents implement the learner code of conduct and it's disciplinary measures. The DA is of the view that the effective implementation of the learner code of conduct will help protect teachers against violence by learners. The DA will request MEC Lehari to ensure that the learner code of conduct is implemented in all schools and signed by all parents. The DA has in the past called on the MEC to conduct a safety audit of schools, and to put safety measures in place, however, our requests have been ignored. The DA once again calls on MEC Lehari to implement a comprehensive and integrated safety policy at schools involving stakeholders such as the police, and community-based organizations. It is time that the ANC-led government prioritise the safety of learners and teachers, this should not be done as a knee-jerk reaction to tragedies but through a comprehensive and proactive action steps. Issued by Tutu Faleni, Democratic Alliance Provincial Spokesperson for Education, 1 October 2018