MKMVA welcomes the decision of the ANC NEC to continue with the implementation of the resolution of the 54th National Conference of the ANC in pursuit of the inclusion of all MK Veterans 2 October 2018 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) welcomes the decision of the National Executive Committee (NEC) of the ANC, directing the NEC Peace and Stability Committee to form a task team that must work towards having a representative conference immediately after elections. We note that this decision is in line with the relevant Resolution of the 54th National Conference of the ANC, that stated that; "Conference noted the work started by the outgoing NEC to investigate the issues relating to MKMVA and the MK Council, and mandated the incoming NEC to facilitate unity and inclusion of all MK ex-combitants". Immediately after the 54th National Conference MKMVA issued a media statement (dated the 20th of December 2017), welcoming the outcomes of the Conference and specifically the Resolution of the ANC National Conference concerning unity among MK ex-combitants, and pledged to work with the NEC of the ANC in pursuit of this noble objective. In that same statement we emphasised the importance of unity in order to be able to address, as effectively as possible, the plight of our MK veterans. Many MK veterans are destitute, and have been battling to access the provisions they are entitled to, as are provided for their well-being, and the well-being of their families, in terms of the Military Veterans, Act No. 18, of 2011. The sad reality is that far too many MK veterans have not been able to access these at all. Already then we expressed our concern, and in this media statement of today we again express our concern, that the Department of Military Veterans (DMV) falls short in providing the services that it is supposed to deliver to the members of MKMVA and all MK ex-combatants. In a further media statement that we issued after our first MKMVA NEC meeting held in 2018, dated the 3rd and the 4th of March, we noted that; "the most important task of MKMVA continues to be the delivery of services to our members, in order to alleviate their plight and to secure dignified lives for them and their families." In this regard the National Office Bearers (NOB's) of MKMVA, as instructed by the NEC of MKMVA. had several meetings with the management of the Department of Military Veterans (DMV) in order to raise our concerns, and to try to find solutions. These concerns included, inter alia, our very serious concern about the poor and incomplete state of the Military Veterans Data Base, and the seemingly insurmountable problems that many of our legitimate MK veterans experience to be included in the Data Base. We noted that this problem had to be addressed urgently, because it is a major reason why many of our members are not able to access the provisions and rights that they are entitled to. Our engagements with the DMV in this regard are ongoing, and will continue until all the issues that we have raised are addressed to our satisfaction, and the satisfaction of our members. It is our belief that these ongoing engagements with DMV are becoming increasingly more constructive and productive, and are beginning to deliver the desired results. Similarly MKMVA, as the legitimate structure of MK veterans, will continue our ongoing work through the length-and-breadth of our country to engage with all MK veterans, and to address their concerns, and in general to work for their well being. The process that the NEC of the ANC decided to continue with, in pursuit of unity, will be advanced by MKMVA continuing to carry out our mandate for the delivery of services to our members. In doing so MKMVA is giving expression to our agreement with the NEC that a relevant and successful association must first and foremost address the plight of all MK veterans. It is important to note that contrary to malicious rumours, and deliberate fake news, that were disseminated before the NEC meeting of the past weekend, to the effect that MKMVA would be disbanded, nothing of the kind happened. The NEC in their collective wisdom, while acknowledging the legitimate status of MKMVA, proceeded along the measured and politically mature route that the 54th National Conference of the ANC mandated them to follow. MKMVA concurs that this is in the best interest of our members, and will ultimately culminate in the desired unity and inclusion of all MK ex-combatants. Issued by Carl Niehaus, MKMVA NEC Member and National Spokesperson, 2 October 2018