FF Plus welcomes second European Parliament fact mission looking into burning issues in South Africa 31 October 2018 A delegation of the European Parliament on a fact mission in South Africa visited the FF Plus this week in Cape Town to discuss some of the burning issues in South Africa with the leadership of the party, particularly farm attacks and expropriation without compensation. The delegation is headed by Mr Nicolas Bay, the joint president of the group Europe of Nations and Freedom (ENF). Mr Bay is also a representative of the French party Rassemblement National (RN) of Marine Le Pen. He was accompanied by Mr Philip Claeys of Vlaams Belang in Flanders, Belgium. (See photo below). Dr Pieter Groenewald, leader of the FF Plus, Dr Corné Mulder (Chief Whip) and Dr Pieter Mulder, former leader of the party, spoke with the group and provided them with background information and statistics on farm attacks and the land issue and also informed them of the political situation in South Africa. These talks form part of the FF Plus's Fight Back SA campaign, which is an attempt to inform the international community of the threat to property rights in South Africa as well as other human rights abuses. The talks follow on a previous visit by a delegation of the German AfD (Alternative for Germany) party that visited the FF Plus's parliamentary caucus and that looked into the same issues. Dr Groenewald also visited Germany earlier this year as part of the FF Plus’s internationalising campaign. Among other things, he participated in and addressed a silent protest march against farm murders held by the Vlaams Belang Youth Action in Gent. He met with Members of the European Parliament and addressed the presidency of UNPO (Unrepresented Nations & Peoples Organization) as well. Dr Corné Mulder also visited the European Union this year on invitation of a British Member of the European Parliament, Ms Janice Atkinson, and there he was granted the opportunity to inform the European Members of Parliament of farm attacks and expropriation without compensation. Should the Constitution of South Africa be amended to allow for expropriation without compensation, it will constitute a violation of, among others, the United Nations’ (UN) Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is, therefore, important that the FF Plus continues to drive the internationalisation programme forward and that the party liaise with the international community so that the world can take note of what is going on in South Africa before it is too late. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 31 October 2018