Ventersdorp unrest a result of failing ANC’s mismanagement of Tlokwe-Ventersdorp merger 15 October 2018 The weekend visit to the protest-ridden Ventersdorp by North West Premier, Job Mokgoro, where he made broken promises, comes a little too late to clean up the mess that the failing ANC has created over the years. Last week residents of Ventersdorp took to the streets protesting and demanding the delivery of the N14 development project promised in 2006 and other service delivery related issues. A truck was set alight in the process and a van was reportedly stoned. The truth is that the failing ANC created this mess in 2016 when they proceeded to merge Tlokwe and Ventersdorp against public outcry and fierce opposition. Through the whole process, the failing ANC only used the residents of Ventersdorp to maintain and keep their seats in the council. The failing ANC never considered the consequences that this merger would have despite the fact that the DA warned on various occasions that the amalgamation will have serious implications on the municipality’s finances as well as negatively affect the lives of the people. The amalgamation did not only let the people of Ventersdorp down, but it has also negatively affected the residents of Tlokwe, the municipality was once prosperous and has now been governed into the ground by the factionalised ANC. Premier Mokgoro promised residents that there would be a special council meeting on Friday 19 October 2018 to resolve this issues. He also promised the following: - 95/5 Electricity system will be reversed with immediate effect. - All Provincial Head of Departments (HODs) will be deployed to Ventersdorp to start resolving various issues raised by the community. - Premier has committed to speak directly with the President, Demarcation Board and Sanral for the N14 development. - The Premier instructed the Mayor to reverse the sites that were advertised as they were allocated to people by Ventersdorp Municipality in 2014 and for proper process be followed for transmission of the allocated sites. - Potholes around Ventersdorp must start to be repaired, dumping sites be cleaned and sewage drainage to be unblocked and serviced starting tomorrow. - Other long-term issues will be resolved during the availability of HODs in Ventersdorp. - Department of Traffic services be reinstated in Ventersdorp Municipality. - All strategic positions be brought back to Ventersdorp municipality. - And on the resignation of councillors, the Premier will refer this issue to relevant structures as he is not in a position to take decisions alone as councillors are deployed by the ANC. When Premier Mokgoro stepped into office he made all sorts of promises, the DA has reviewed his 100 days in office and we can report that it is the same old empty promises that the failing ANC is so used to making. There is no action taken against corrupt officials and cadres who are responsible for the collapse of municipalities and there is no political will to resolve challenges our communities face. People are desperate for jobs and opportunities, and yet the failing ANC is only interested in serving themselves and their own interests. The failing ANC is so distracted by factionalised infighting that they fail to attend to the concerns of people on the ground. The people of North West are tired of empty promises and Premiers who only serve the failing ANC. The DA is the only party that can bring change and build One South Africa for All, the only party that can bring the much-needed change that will guarantee accelerated service delivery, grow the economy and open access to jobs. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 15 October 2018