ANC expressed disgust over the extent of sexual violence in the country 15 October 2018 The African National Congress expresses its disgust on the increasing incidents of sexual violence against women and children in the country. We have noted media reports on the extent of sexual assault on both women and men. These heinous crimes committed against our people are reported widely in the media including social media. This week's alarming evidence given by a young witness, Ms Cheryl Zondi in the Eastern Cape High Court in Port Elizabeth in the case involving a Nigerian Pastor Timothy Omotoso was a revelation of moral decay in our society. The church is supposed to be place where people get spiritual fulfillment. These harrowing accounts are revealed against the backdrop of the rape of a six-year-old girl at Dros Restaurant in Pretoria, the alleged sexual molestation of 15 boys by a school teacher in the Vereeniging as well as the increasing number of sexual assault incidents in the institutions of higher learning and religious organisation. The African National Congress adopted a holistic strategy to deal with gender based violence in 54th National Elective Conference. These include public education and awareness on criminal evidence required for successful prosecution of cases of violence against women and children. The full might of the criminal justice system including denial of bail and the sentence regime, should be utilised as deterrents, especially because it seems like that perpetrators continue with these deplorable deeds with no regard for existing legal or social measures. The ANC supports the swift action taken by Higher Education Minister Naledi Pandor in calling an urgent meeting with University Vice-Chancellors to discuss increased gender based violence in institutions of higher learning. Gender violence either in a form of sexual assault, molestation of young boys and girls is a violation of human rights. The ANC acknowledge progress made in establishing gender machinery over the last decade, however more needs to be done. The ANC calls on all South Africans to stand shoulder to shoulder to curtail the scourge of gender based violence. We urge people to work tirelessly to eradicate gender based violence. Issued by Pule Mabe, ANC National Spokesperson, 15 October 2018