Statement by the African National Congress on the conference of African Liberation Movement and Western Sahara 15 October 2018 The African National Congress, together with other African Liberation Movements, have reaffirmed their full and unwavering support to the Saharawi people's right to freedom and independence. The African National Congress (ANC) applauds Western Sahara and its people for their resilience and steadfast determination to achieve their liberation. The ANC represented by its National Executive Committee Member Comrade Thomas Bongo was a participant at the Conference of African Liberation Movements, parties and Forces which was held in the Saharawi Refugee camps in the South West of Algeria from the 11th to the 12th of October 2018. Other participants included the Ugandan NRM, Namibian SWAPO, Algerian FLN, Zimbabwean ZANU-PF and the Saharawi liberation movement, Polisario Front. The Conference was convened by the Polisario Front, the ANC's long-standing fraternal partner in Western Sahara. Representatives of African liberation movements and political parties, participating in the First Conference of African Liberation Movements, Parties and Forces, adopted a declaration in which they announced the constitution of a "Forum of African Liberation Movements and parties", and reiterated that Africa would not be free until Western Sahara got rid of colonialism and occupation. The holding of this Conference in the Saharawi refugee camps is very symbolic, because it reminded Africans and the world that the historic mission of African Liberation Movements and parties is not yet accomplished. In this regard, the participants to the conference also adopted a Final Communiqué in which they "reiterate commitment as liberation movements, political parties and countries to tirelessly advocate for the need to accelerate the completion of the decolonisation of Western Sahara, Africa's last colony." They further highlighted the need to intensify assistance to the Saharawi people and called on the international community to respond urgently and practically to the humanitarian, social, economic situation confronting Western Sahara. The ANC noted at its 54th National Conference that Western Sahara was the only remaining colony on the African continent, and reaffirmed the inalienable right of the Saharawi people to self- determination and independence. The ANC further condemned Morocco's withdrawal from the UN-Ied peace process, which has led to the current impasse. After rising tensions in the southern Western Sahara, the IJnited Nations called for restraint, and the ANC is encouraged by the withdrawal of both the Moroccan and polisario Front forces from the region, as reported at the United Nations in April, 2018, and notes the extension of the UN Security Council mandate to the 31st of October 2018. The ANC welcomes the UN invitation for the affected parties, namely Morocco, polisario Front, Algeria and Mauritania, to hold talks in Geneva on ending the conflict, and has urged the parties to heed the call. The ANC supports the African Union's call made in July this year, for an end to the illegal exploration of the natural resources of Western Sahara in the illegally occupied territory. The ANC believes that it is imperative for former and current liberation movements and progressive parties to consolidate their efforts to sustain the gains of the struggles for liberation and to work together towards sustainable development and prosperity in Africa. On the second day of the Conference (12 October 2018), participants also attended the Commemoration by the Saharawi people of the Centenary of the great son of Africa and humanity, Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela. Comrade Bongo, ANC NEC member delivered the Nelson Mandela Memorial Lecture. The 12th of October also marked the National Day of Unity in Western Sahara, which has been celebrated every year since 1975. The Saharawi National Day of Unity marks the day when Saharawi's from all walks of life and political tendencies joined forces and united behind the banner of Polisario Front as their legitimate and sole representative. In memory and honour of Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, the ANC hopes that all parties concerned about human rights and silencing the guns by 2020, will support the right of the people of Western Sahara to independence and self-determination, and the end of conflict in the region. The Conference resolved to hold a Second Conference of the Forum of Liberation Movements and I Issued by Lindiwe Zulu, Chairperson International Relations Sub –Committee, African National Congress, 15 October 2018