VBSHeist: Mkhize and 15 ANC mayors must step down if ANC is serious about corruption 29 October 2018 On Monday, the ANC’s national integrity commission recommended that members of its party who have been implicated in the VBS Mutual Bank heist step aside from all leadership positions and all activities of the ANC. If the party is not simply playing politics and serious about accountability, then the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Zweli Mkhize, and the 15 ANC mayors who invested billions in public money into VBS Mutual Bank would resign immediately. Reports this weekend suggest that Mkhize, in 2016, during his tenure as ANC treasurer-general allegedly solicited a “donation” of R2 million from Vele Investments in return for his help in raising funds from municipalities and state institutions. If true, this would explain why the Minister has refused to intervene in implicated and affected municipalities in this scandal, jeopardising service delivery for people in those areas. The Minister is but one of several ANC officials who have been implicated in the looting of VBS. ANC-run municipalities and their officials were named in an explosive report earlier this month, commissioned by the South African Reserve Bank into the bank’s looting. Thus far, the DA has identified 15 ANC-run municipalities which invested money into VBS and we call on these mayors to step down immediately: These implicated ANC officials include, among others:1. Danny Msiza (Treasurer of the ANC in Limpopo)2. Shonisani Sinyosi (Makhado Local Municipality)3. Sasavona Mathebula (Greater Giyani Local Municipality)4. Joyce Bila (Collins Chabane Local Municipality)5. Julia Lata Mathebe (Elias Motsoaledi Local Municipality)6. Florence Radzilani (Vhembe District Municipality)7. Ramadimetja Kupa (Ephraim Mogale Local Municipality)8. Maudu Johannes Phokane (Tubatse Fetakgomo Local Municipality)9. Nakedi Sibanda (Lepelle Nkumpi Local Municipality)10. Boitumelo Mahlangu (Ruth Mompati District Municipality)11. Betty Diakanyo (Mafikeng Local Municipality)12. Andries Monaheng (Moretele Local Municipality)13. Jostina Mothibe (Madibeng Local Municipality)14. SM Mogale Letsie (Merafong Municipality)15. Boyce Maneli (West Rand District Municipality)16. William Madileng (Dr JS Moroka Municipality) These mayors are politically accountable for their respective municipalities and the investments that were made.If the ANC is truly committed to rooting out corruption, it will immediately instruct these members implicated in the VBS scandal to step down, or fire those who refuse to step down. If the ANC fails to do this, the DA has once again instructed our caucuses in these respective municipalities to move motions of no confidence against these mayors. These fifteen municipalities have invested close to R1.5 billion in VBS and these monies are essentially lost. This could have serious consequences on service delivery to residents. President Cyril Ramaphosa’s commitment to root out corruption rings hollow if his party is not prepared to cut ties with Mkhize and these 15 mayors. The VBS scandal clearly shows that corruption still thrives in the ANC. The DA will not stop until all those who have been implicated in this scandal are investigated to the fullest extent of the law. Issued by Kevin Mileham, DA Shadow Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, 29 October 2018