#McGluwaForPremier: DA calls for immediate suspension of SAPS officer accused of rape 18 October 2018 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West will write to the Provincial Police Commissioner, Brenda Motswenyane, requesting that she suspends a Warrant Officer from the Public Order Policing (POPS), based in Potchefstroom who is accussed of allegedly raping a 14 year old girl. He was arrested yesterday and appeared in the Ventersdorp Magistrate’s Court this morning. He must be suspended immediately pending trial. It is alleged that a police Nyala, with two police officers, picked up four girls in Tshing, Ventersdorp. The girls were allegedly promised food and drinks. According to a report, two of the girls were then ordered out of the police Nyala after which the police officers left with the remaining two girls. One of the girls was taken to a guest house, where she was raped. The residents of North West deserve to feel safe in a secure environment, where they are able to rely on the South African Police Service to protect them. The community should trust law enforcement members in uniform. Our province’s young people and women cannot live in fear at the hands of sexual predators, particularly when the perpetrators are supposed to serve and protect. It is estimated that over 40% of South African women will be raped in their lifetime and that only 1 in 4 rapes are reported. It is also estimated that only 14% of perpetrators of rape are convicted in South Africa. The reality is that this is an on-going fight, especially where little or nothing is being done to root out the problem where perpetrators do not get a harsh enough punishment or the wheels of justice are rolling too slowly. Therefore, we will monitor this case and ask the police commissioner to report back on the progress on the of case. Our communities are crime-ridden and need a caring government that will not hesitate to act against serious crimes and ensure a competent and well-resourced service. The time has come to remove the tsotsis in uniform that abuse their positions in pursuit of a criminal agenda. The DA is committed to bring change that establishes a professional, honest and well-resourced police. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 18 October 2018