Failing ANC dodges MONC debate to avoid accountability to the people of Merafong 25 October 2018 Today the DA in Merafong brought a motion of no confidence in Mayor Mogale-Letsie over the VBS investment that aided the total collapse of municipal services. In an unsurprising move, the Speaker declined the motion on spurious technical grounds in a thinly-veiled attempt to shield the failing ANC from being held accountable for their actions. Whilst the gallery was filled to the brim with ANC supporters, and the public was being denied access to the Council Chamber, the very same ANC was protesting outside the Chamber under the guise of SANCO. Whilst chanting “Run Maphefo, Run”, ANC members wearing Party regalia lit fires in Halite street in front of the Rates Hall. They vowed that should the Mayor not be forced to leave, they will resort to violent protests. The faling ANC lost their composure inside the chamber as well and resorted to insulting the DA Caucus Leader and calling him “Oupa”, in an attempt to hide their complicity in keeping the looting brigade alive and well. The DA will continue to expose the rampant corruption and looting in the Merafong Municipality as we have done for the past 7 years, since this Mayor took office. Since 2011 the financial situation in Merafong has deteriorated thus: - Blyvoor Mine owed us R59 million in 2011 and now owes us in excess of R450 million; - Total debtors in 2011 totalled R592 million. It now stands at R 1,575 billion, having grown by nearly R1 billion; - Outstanding Creditors were R19,8 million. It is now R313 million; - It was reported in 2011 that for the first time in 4 years Council experienced cash flow difficulties. This is now the daily norm in Merafong; - In 2011 we could pay Creditors within 30 days. We now pay Creditors in excess of 180 days; - In 2011 we started withdrawing our investments to offset expenditure. We now have no investments of our own; and - The VBS millions now quite likely lost, is simply another notch in the Mayor’s belt We will not be deterred by insults, or a Speaker who rides roughshod over the Standing Rules and bends them to suit the nefarious agenda of his political masters in the falling ANC. The motion will be re-introduced at the next ordinary sitting of Council. The DA calls on the Executive Mayor to do the honourable thing, and resign from her position immediately. Issued by Ina Cilliers, DA Constituency Head for Merafong, 25 October 2018