ANC in KZN to start a journey towards a landslide victory in 2019 general election 18 October 2018 The African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal will be intensifying a voter registration campaign this weekend - marking the first phase of the election campaign. With a population of more than 11, 5 million people, this province has contributed significantly in the national and provincial elections over the years. During the last general elections in 2014, more than 5, 1 million people from KZN registered to vote and about 3, 8 million people voted. All in all, the voter turnout was 75.98%. In view of these figures, the ANC is embarking on a campaign to get more people to register to vote in the 2019 general election.  This Saturday, 20th October - thousands of people in the Greater Durban Area are expected to attend the Launch of ID and Voter Registration Campaign at the Moses Mabhida People’s Park. First time applications for 16-year old and above, and in possession of birth-certificates will be processed free of charge by the Home Affairs staff. Those applying for new IDs are encouraged to bring in an old ID, proof of address and R140. For those who lost their IDs, they must bring an affidavit – ID number, proof of address and R140 – all paid to Home Affairs. Importantly, the staff from the Independent Electoral Commission will be available to assist people to register and to do address harvesting.  The ANC believes that the address of voters must be accurate and maintained so that voters could cast their votes in the correct ward and voting district. Critically, the ANC is calling upon its leaders across all structures including volunteers to be at the forefront of the mobilization of people to attend the launch this weekend. Together we must start this journey towards a landslide victory in the 2019 general elections. The ANC extends an invitation to the leaders of society – traditional and religious leaders including captains of industry to work with the ANC ahead of the elections. We have a responsibility to strengthen the ANC to become a more potent weapon for the transformation of our society and improvement of the lives of all our people. Only the ANC can deliver a future of our dreams as espoused by Nelson Mandela – who would have turned 100 years this year. Issued by Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu, Provincial Spokesperson, African National Congress KwaZulu-Natal, 18 October 2018