ANC has once again won in a by-election on the lower South Coast 25 October 2018 Dr Pixley ka Isaka Seme House: The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal has once again showed strength following a landslide victory in the by-election in Ward 28 in Ray Nkonyeni Municipality. This ward, which was previously represented by the ANC, became vacant following the death of an ANC councilor, Cde Mziwandile Herbert Mncube who was loved by the community. The ANC pays tribute to individual members of the community who exercised their rights and voted for their candidates.  The ward was contested by Victor Bekithemba Zulu of the (ANC); Musawenkosi Collin Xolo of the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF); and Lindeni Goodness Jama of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP). In yesterday’s by-election, the ANC once again emerged victorious and won by 88.35%. This is a clear indication that the community has confidence in the glorious movement of liberation stalwarts - former President Nelson Mandela and Mama Albertina Sisulu. The ANC undertakes to strengthen service delivery to demonstrate appreciation to ordinary members of society who once again voted for the ANC.  During the 2017 municipal by-elections the voter turn-out was 45.94% and the ANC candidate won the ward with 91.41% of valid votes. Acting in partnership with our communities, the ANC will ensure that the elected councillor hold regular meetings with the community.  The ANC has reiterated to its councillors that communication is a vital tool in ensuring that the right kind of service is delivered to the right kind of community. Importantly, ANC councillors in Ray Nkonyeni Municipality will continue to form partnerships with local businesses in order to create job opportunities. Across the province, reports are coming out that businesses are heeding the call for joint ownership of local economic development in partnership with local municipalities. As the ANC we say let us harness this show of goodwill in order to enhance development and service delivery. We have to ensure that many of our people have access to economic opportunities which were previously reserved for the minority. We say this because we fully understand that freedom without access to economic opportunities is not complete. Critically, the ANC wishes to congratulate the regional ANC leadership in the Lower South Coast and all volunteers of the ANC for working tirelessly during the campaign period. In addition, the ANC is encouraged by the undertaking from the local leadership that they will work with all political parties moving forward, especially those who have in their hearts, an interest of ensuring service delivery to our people. This is a clear demonstration that the local leadership understand the party values of selfless service to the community. Indeed, in a democratic government such as ours, vulnerable members of society, have more interest in the solutions to local challenges other than individual interests. Issued by Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu, Provincial Spokesperson, ANC KZN, 25 October 2018