STATEMENT ON NHLANHLA NENE'S INTENTION TO REVEAL HIS CONNECTIONS TO THE GUPTAS Tuesday, 2 October, 2018 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) notes the reports that Minister of Finance intends to reveal his connections and close working relationship with the Guptas when he was Deputy Minister of Finance and Chairperson of the State Owned Asset Management Company, the Public Investment Corporation (PIC). The EFF wrote a letter to Nhlanhla Nene on the 22nd of May 2018 asking him about his relationship with the Guptas and the many instances he negotiated business dealings with them. Even with the resolution of the Standing Committee on Finance that he must respond, he refused to respond to the questions. This is against Parliamentary Rules and practice which obliges all Members of the Executive to truthfully and consistently respond to questions asked by Members of Parliament, who are in Parliament to represent the people. During the State of the Nation Debate, the Commander in Chief Julius Malema cautioned ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa and specially said that Nhlanhla Nene is not what the media presented him to be. The CiC further said that the EFF wrote a letter to him and that he must honestly respond and should he choose not to, then we will expose him. Even with such clear indication and guidance, Cyril Ramaphosa did not care to hold his Minister accountable and kept him in office despite the many wrong things he did as deputy minister of Finance. What the Nhlanhla Nene developments reveal is that throughout his tenure as deputy Minister of Finance and Chairperson of the PIC, Nhlanhla Nene was captured by the Guptas and worked for them. He negotiated business deals for them and bullied those who sought money from the PIC to submit to the demands of the Guptas. The reason Nhlanhla Nene was appointed as Minister of Finance by a captured Jacob Zuma was because he worked with the Guptas. When he was Minister of Finance, he stopped taking their calls and tried to work independent of the Guptas. That is the reason they approached Mcebisi Jonas and later Des Van Rooyen to be Minister of Finance because their appointee was no longer cooperative. When Nhlanhla Nene was removed, he played victim and proclaimed oblivion to the real reason he was fired. South Africa went into an economic and financial turmoil because of his own doings and corroboration with the Guptas. What all these developments reveal is that Nhlanhla Nene is not an honest and respectable Minister we all thought he was. He is a crook who would do anything to assume a leadership responsibility, even at the expense of principles. When he finishes his submission to the State Capture Inquiry, Nhlanhla Nene must immediately step down as Minister of Finance. The EFF is aware of many other dealings and dark secrets that compromises Nhlanhla Nene and will reveal all if he does not voluntarily step down as a Minister of Finance. The EFF does not make threats, we make promises and every information we have is correct about all the shenanigans and Crooks of the ANC. Under no circumstances will we, as the EFF, defend scheming individuals who mislead the nations into national fury for things they have created for themselves. The people of South Africa should know that there is no one credible and honest in the entire leadership of the ANC. They have dark and dodgy secrets. That is why the ANC must be removed from power in 2019 and replaced by a revolutionary corrupt free economic emancipation movement. What the Nhlanhla Nene developments reveal is that throughout his tenure as deputy Minister of Finance and Chairperson of the PIC, Nhlanhla Nene was captured by the Guptas and worked for them. He negotiated business deals for them and bullied those who sought money from the PIC to submit to the demands of the Guptas. The reason Nhlanhla Nene was appointed as Minister of Finance by a captured Jacob Zuma was because he worked with the Guptas. When he was Minister of Finance, he stopped taking their calls and tried to work independent of the Guptas. That is the reason they approached Mcebisi Jonas and later Des Van Rooyen to be Minister of Finance because their appointee was no longer cooperative. When Nhlanhla Nene was removed, he played victim and proclaimed oblivion to the real reason he was fired. South Africa went into an economic and financial turmoil because of his own doings and corroboration with the Guptas. What all these developments reveal is that Nhlanhla Nene is not an honest and respectable Minister we all thought he was. He is a crook who would do anything to assume a leadership responsibility, even at the expense of principles. When he finishes his submission to the State Capture Inquiry, Nhlanhla Nene must immediately step down as Minister of Finance. The EFF is aware of many other dealings and dark secrets that compromises Nhlanhla Nene and will reveal all if he does not voluntarily step down as a Minister of Finance. The EFF does not make threats, we make promises and every information we have is correct about all the shenanigans and Crooks of the ANC. Under no circumstances will we, as the EFF, defend scheming individuals who mislead the nations into national fury for things they have created for themselves. The people of South Africa should know that there is no one credible and honest in the entire leadership of the ANC. They have dark and dodgy secrets. That is why the ANC must be removed from power in 2019 and replaced by a revolutionary corrupt free economic emancipation movement. South Africa needs to save itself from the ANC-Ied corrupt government which is making the lives of ordinary people very difficult. Under the Ramaphosa ANC, the lives of our people are not getting better, they are getting worse. We need action! Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 2 October 2018