Magashule’s Gupta links confirmed by former MEC Former MEC for Economic Development and Tourism, Mxolisi Dukwana has indicated that he is prepared to testify against Ace Magashule before the Zondo Commission. Seemingly Dukwana has documents that clearly indicate Magashule’s role in Provincial Capture. This supports the DA’s request that Magashule should be called to the Zondo Commission to answer questions regarding allegations of state capture and corruption during his term of office in the Free State. The ANC factionalism and divisions in the Free State are now visible for all to see, the centre is not holding. Voters can no longer ignore this and the effect it has had on the circumstances of our people. The Free State government has been a conduit through which the resources were distributed to the Gupta family and other companies in the province. This includes the Vrede Dairy Farm, the landing of the Guptas in the Waterkloof Air Force Base with Magashule’s assistance and the exorbitant amounts paid by the Province towards the New Age Breakfast. Magashule should have his day in the Commission and come clean about his involvement in the Provincial Capture. The new ANC administration in the Free State continue to shelter Magashule from accountability and continue with his legacy of patronage, maladministration and many allegations of corruption and nepotism. Only the DA will bring a clean government that works for all South Africans. Statement issued by Patricia Kopane MP, DA Free State Provincial Leader and Premier Candidate, 19 October 2018 Update: Magashule must account for FS State Capture at Zondo Commission The revelations that Tony Gupta allegedly offered former Free State Economic Development MEC, Mxolisi Dukwana, R2 million a month for 10 years in exchange for allowing the controversial family to gain control of a development project in the Free State worth R41.8bn shows how deep the rot of State Capture runs. ANC Secretary-General, Ace Magashule, and former President Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane, were allegedly present when Gupta made the offer to Dukwana and the claims give credence to the call that the Democratic Alliance has been making for Magashule to appear before the Zondo Commission so the public can know fully the extent of his role in allowing State Capture to flourish in the Free State during his time as Premier. Dukwana’s decision to turn down the offer is honourable, but the allegations show there is much that is still unknown about the extent to which the State Capture project ran. We encourage more people to come forward and Mr Dukwana to testify before the Zondo Commission. Magashule has been named in several scandals linked to the Gupta family, including the corruption that took place at the Vrede Dairy Farm as well as the massive amounts of money the Guptas received from the Free State government through the series of New Age Business Breakfasts. He must now come clean about his role in State Capture at the Free State and be cross-examined by the Commission. This is the reason the DA has also called for President Cyril Ramaphosa to appear before the Zondo Commission as it is clear that those who have looted the state are at the highest levels of government and the ANC. Instead of fighting corruption, the failing ANC government has allowed the abuse of state resources by shielding the likes of Magashule from scrutiny and accountability. Only the DA can fix this broken system in which corruption has become a norm. Under a DA government, those who are found guilty of corruption would be sentenced to a minimum of 15 years in jail. We would create a model of government that ensures transparency, openness and fairness so that nobody can get away with stealing from South Africans. Statement issued by Patricia Kopane MP, DA Free State Provincial Leader and Premier Candidate, 21 October 2018 