GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE BAR OF SOUTH AFRICA 5 October 2018 On Media Coverage on Retired Judge Franklyn Kroon’s testimony before the Nugent Commission on SARS The General Council of the Bar (“the GCB”) notes with concern certain media coverage (and in particular the Daily Maverick article ascribed to investigative journalist Jacques Pauw dated 2 October 2018), concerning the evidence of retired Judge Frank Kroon concerning the SARS Board of Enquiry which he chaired in 2015. The GCB, an association of fourteen Societies of Advocates across the country, respects the right to freedom of the media including the right to impart information and ideas and members of the advocates’ profession have been in the forefront of numerous cases asserting such rights in our courts and elsewhere. However, as the GCB has noted in media releases on several occasions, the judiciary is one of the cornerstones of our democracy. Its dignity and independence is to be respected and will be defended by the GCB when it comes under attack. It is not the purpose of this statement to enter the fray concerning the merits or demerits of Judge Kroon’s performance as chairman of the SARS Board of Enquiry, but rather to correct certain factual errors and inferences based at least in part on an apparent failure properly to appreciate the role of the judiciary and the constraints within which judges, whether sitting in court or deployed elsewhere to chair commissions or boards of enquiry, are required to operate. The article does not merely report on the evidence given by Judge Kroon to the Nugent Commission and describe certain errors to which the Judge is reported to have admitted concerning the SARS board of enquiry previously chaired by Judge Kroon, but involves a personal attack on the judge, the headline claiming that the judge “went rogue” and that he made “a finding that he knew was erroneous and baseless.” More particularly the judge is criticised for failing to retract findings said to have been made by him some four years ago and is alleged to be the first judge publically to have admitted a mistake “under oath”. As the basis for the innuendo that Judge Kroon was handpicked in order deliberately to prejudice certain former SARS officials, the claim is made in the article that Judge Kroon “appears to be a rather undistinguished former judge from the Eastern Cape who served for 16 years on the Bench.” In fact, Judge Kroon served for 28 years on the Eastern Cape bench, was a judge of appeal on the Labour Appeal Court bench and acted as a judge of the Supreme Court of Appeal and of the Constitutional Court respectively. These are matters of public record and are irreconcilable with the description in the article of Judge Kroon’s judicial career. Secondly, the article displays a lack of appreciation for the fact that judges do not ordinarily admit to “errors” even if they subsequently come to the realisation that they may have erred. The reason is that once they have given judgement, it would be improper to do so, as they are “functus officio”, which means that they have discharged their duty. The same applies to a report rendered by a board of enquiry. Chaos would ensue if judges presiding in boards of enquiry were of their own accord to supply updates of their original conclusions on the basis of new facts that enter the public domain, or a newfound realisation that they erred in their original conclusions. Any perceived errors in court judgements are dealt with by way of the appeal procedure. In the case of a commission or board of enquiry, both procedural irregularities (such as the failure to hear a person entitled to be heard) and factual conclusions are (within the constraints of that remedy) corrected by way of judicial review on application by any aggrieved party to the High Court. But for the forum of the Nugent Commission of Enquiry, it would therefore not have been open to Judge Kroon publicly to correct any errors in the findings of the board report which bears his name. CRAIG WATT-PRINGLE SC CHAIRPERSON GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE BAR OF SOUTH AFRICA Issued by GCB, 7 October 2018